Notice to Reader
This CPA Canada Guide was prepared by the CPA Information Management and Technology Advisory Committee
(IMTAC) and is based on the the AICPA version that was prepared in 2011 by the Trust/Data Integrity Task Force
and the Privacy Task Force of the Assurance Services Executive Committee of the AICPA to assist Practitioners in
performing audits under A T section 101, Attest Engagements (AICPA, Professional Standards), to report on a service
organization’s controls over its system relevant to security , availability , processing integrity , confidentiality , or privacy .
This Guide has not been issued under the authority of the Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (AASB). CPA
Canada, its boards and committees, and IMTAC are not responsible for any errors, omissions or results obtained from
the use of this Guide. It has not been adopted, endorsed, approved, disapproved or otherwise acted upon by a Board,
Committee, the governing body or membership of CPA Canada or any provincial Institute/Ordre.
© 2014 Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada
Cataloguing information available from the National Library of Canada
All rights reserved.
This publication is protected by copyright and written permission is required to reproduce, store in a retrieval system or
transmit in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise).
For information regarding permission, please contact permissions@cpacanada.ca
ASEC Trust/Data Integrity Task Force and AICPA/CPA Canada Privacy
Task Force SOC 2 Guide Working Group
Chris Halterman, Chair Audrey Katcher
Gary Baker Kevin Knight
Efrim Boritz John Lainhart
Mark Eich Dave Palmer
Sheri Fedokovitz Tom Patterson
Everett Johnson Don Sheehy
CPA Canada Information Management and Technology Advisory
Committee Group
Mario R. Durigon, Chair Ray HenricksonChris Anderson Andrew Kwong
Gary Baker Richard Livesley
Efrim Boritz Robert Parker
Nancy Cheng Robert J. Reimer
Malik Datardina Bryan C. Walker
Henry GrunbergPreface
Introduction
The Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants (CICA), now operating as Chartered Professional
Accountants of Canada (CPA Canada)1 and the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA)
have a long history of working co-operatively in developing guidance for the audits of business systems. This
Guide is the latest example of this cooperation.
Purpose and Applicability
This Guide has been prepared by the Information and Management Technology Advisory Committee of CPA
Canada’s Research, Guidance and Support Group to assist Canadian practitioners engaged to examine and
report on a service organization’s controls over one or more of the following:
The security of a service organization’s system
The availability of a service organization’s system
The processing integrity of a service organization’s system
The confidentiality of the information that the service organization’s system processes or maintains for user
entities
The privacy of personal information that the service organization collects, uses, retains, discloses, and
disposes of for user entities
The engagement described in this Guide is based on the requirements and guidance established in CP A
Canada Handbook – Assurance (Handbook) Section 5025, Standards for Assurance Engagements Other
Than Audits of Financial Statements and Other Historical Financial Information, also known as the
assurance standards. These standards establish a framework for assurance engagements, other than audits of
financial statements and other historical financial information performed by practitioners, and for the ongoing
development of related standards.
A practitioner may be engaged to examine and report on controls at a service organization related to various
types of subject matter (for example, controls that affect user entities’ financial reporting or the privacy of
information processed for user entities’ customers). The applicable professional standard for such engagements
may vary , depending on the subject matter. To make practitioners aware of the various professional standards
and guides available to them for examining and reporting on controls at a service organization and to help
practitioners select the appropriate standard or guide for a particular engagement, the CICA, in the same
manner as the AICPA in 2011, has introduced the term “service organization controls (SOC) reports”. Thefollowing are designations for three such engagements and the source of the guidance for performing and
reporting on them:
SOC 1: The CPA Canada Guide, Service Organizations — Applying CSAE 3416, Reporting on Controls
at a Service Organization
SOC 2: The CPA Canada Guide to Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to
Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality or Privacy
SOC 3: Trust Services Report for Service Organizations (Prepared using the Trust Services Principles,
Criteria, and Illustrations for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality and Privacy
developed by AICPA and CPA Canada. (Available at www .cica.ca/resources-and-member -
benefits/growing-your -firm/trust-services/item10796.pdf)
This Guide focuses on SOC 2 engagements. Paragraph 1.24 of this Guide includes a table that compares
features of the three engagements.
Trust Services
CPA Canada and the AICPA have jointly developed a set of principles and criteria to assist practitioners in
performing engagements. The Trust Services Principles and Criteria are a set of professional assurance and
advisory services based on a common framework (that is, a core set of principles and criteria) designed to
address the risks and opportunities of Information Technology and privacy . The Trust Services Principles and
Criteria have been developed by a volunteer task force under the auspices of the AICPA ’s Assurance
Services Executive Committee (ASEC) and CPA Canada’s Research, Guidance and Support Group. It is the
most rigorous and comprehensive program of its type available today .
Acknowledgement
The AICPA originally published the guide Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization; Relevant to
Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality or Privacy (SOC 2) in 2011. It has been
adapted with permission for use in Canada and reflects the application of Canadian Assurance Standards. CPA
Canada wishes to thank the AICPA and the AICPA/CPA Canada Trust/Data Integrity Task Force and the
AICPA/CPA Canada Privacy Task Force. All three were instrumental in developing the guide and the
underlying Trust Services Principles and Criteria Relating to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,
Confidentiality and Privacy.
CPA Canada also recognizes the contribution of Mr. Donald E. Sheehy , CA·CISA, CRISC, Associate
Partner, Enterprise Risk, Deloitte & Touche LLP. Don has been a major contributor to the development of the
Trust Services Principles and Criteria and the SOC Guidance. Don prepared the initial draft of this Guide.1
Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada
March 2014
NOTICE OF FUTURE CHANGES AFFECTING THIS PUBLICATION
As noted in this publication, SOC 2 and 3 engagements are based substantially on the Trust Services
Principles and Criteria (TSPC). In 2012, it was determined that improvements in the usability of these
Principles and Criteria would be desirable to increase the clarity of the criteria, eliminate redundancy
amongst the criteria, and update the criteria based on the changing technology and business
environment. The process of making the changes, exposure of the changes and obtaining final approval
is almost complete.
It is expected that the TSPC will be effective for periods ending on or after December 15, 2014. Early
implementation will be permitted. The revised TSPC will be made available from CPA Canada and also
available on www.webtrust.org
.
In conjunction with the release of the next version of the TSPC, the AICPA plans to release revised and
improved Guidance Material covering SOC 2 and 3 engagements. The changes are expected to be in the
nature of additional guidance information rather than substantial changes in practice. It is CPA
Canada’ s plan to review the AICPA material and issue supplemental Canadian guidance. The guidance
in this publication should continue to be used as a reference source pending release of AICPA’ s revised
guidance.
The Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants (CICA) and the Certified Management Accountants of Canada (CMA Canada) joined
together on January 1, 2013, to create Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada (CPA Canada) as the national organization to support
unification of the Canadian accounting profession under the CPA banner.Table of Contents
Notice to Reader
ASEC Trust/Data Integrity Task Force and AICPA/CPA Canada Privacy Task Force SOC 2 Guide Working
Group
CPA Canada Information Management and Technology Advisory Committee Group
Preface
Introduction
Purpose and Applicability
Trust S ervices
Acknowledgement
Notice of Future Changes Affecting this Publication
Chapter 1: Introduction and Background
Service Organization Control 3 Reports under Handbook Section 5025
SOC 1 Reports under CSAE 3416
SOC 2 Reports under Handbook Section 5025
Trust Services Criteria
Two Types of SOC 2 Reports
Difference between SOC 2 and SOC 3 Reports
Trust Services Criteria for SOC 2 and SOC 3 Engagements and Control Objectives for SOC 1 Engagements
Combining SOC 1 and SOC 2 Reports Not Permitted
Comparison of SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3 Engagements and Related Reports
Difference between Privacy and Security
Type 1 or Type 2 SOC 2 Reports
Contents of a SOC 2 Report
Criteria for Evaluating the Fairness of the Presentation of the Description
Applying Certain Auditing StandardsDefinitions
Chapter 2: Planning a Service Auditor’s Engagement
Responsibilities of Management of a Service Organization
Responsibilities of the Service Auditor
Engagement Acceptance and Continuance
Planning to Use the Work of the Internal Audit Function
Materiality
Identifying Deviations
Establishing an Understanding with the Client
Chapter 3: Performing the Engagement
Obtaining and Evaluating Evidence about Whether the Description of the System Is Fairly Presented
Evaluating Whether Controls Have Been Implemented
Other Information in the Description That Is Not Covered by the Service Auditor’s Report
Materiality Relating to the Fair Presentation of the Description
Complementary User-Entity Controls
Subservice Organizations
Changes in the Scope of the Engagement
Evaluating the Suitability of the Design of Controls
O btaining Evidence Regarding the O perating Effectiveness of Controls in a Type 2 Engagement
Designing and Performing Tests of Controls
Nature of Tests of Controls
Testing Controls at an Interim Date
Extent of Tests of Controls
Selecting Items to Be Tested
Controls Included in the Description That Are Not Tested
Testing Changes to Controls
Testing Compliance with Privacy CommitmentsUsing the Work of the Internal Audit Function
Evaluating the Results of Tests
Obtaining Written Representation
Subsequent Events
Documentation
Consideration of Management’s Assertion
Chapter 4: Reporting
Responsibilities of the Service Auditor
Contents of the Service Auditor’s Report
Describing Tests and the Results of Tests in a Type 2 Report
Describing Tests and Results When Using the Internal Audit Function
Modifications of the Service Auditor’s Report
Illustrative Paragraphs When the Description Is Not Fairly Presented
Identifying Information That Is Not Covered by the Service Auditor’s Report
Illustrative Paragraphs: Controls Are Not Suitably Designed
Illustrative Paragraph: Controls Are Not Operating Effectively
Scope Limitation: Service Auditor Is Unable to Obtain Sufficient Appropriate Evidence
Reporting on Compliance with the Commitments in the Statement of Privacy Practices When the Type 2 Report
Addresses the Privacy Principle
Reporting When the Service Organization Uses the Carve-Out Method to Present a Subservice Organization
Denial of Conclusion When the Service Organization Uses the Carve-Out Method to Present a Subservice
Organization
Reporting When the Service Organization Uses the Inclusive Method to Present a Subservice Organization
Intended Users of the Report
Illustrative Type 2 Reports
Appendix A: Information for Management of a Service Organization
Introduction and Background
The Trust Service PrinciplesResponsibilities of Management of a Service Organization
Determining the Type of Engagement to Be Performed
Defining the Scope of the Engagement
Preparing the Description of the Service Organization’s System
Providing a Written Assertion
Additional Management Responsibilities
Criteria for Management’s Description of the Service Organization’s System
Appendix B: Trust Services Principles and Criteria for Security , Availability , Processing Integrity , Confidentiality , and
Privacy
Availability Principle and Criteria Table
Appendix C: Illustrative Management Assertions and Related Service Auditor’s Reports on Controls at a Service
Organization Relevant to Security , Availability , Processing Integrity , Confidentiality , and Privacy
Example 1: Illustrative Management Assertion on Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to the Security ,
Availability , Processing Integrity and Confidentiality Principles
Example 1: Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report on Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to Security ,
Availability , Processing Integrity and Confidentiality
Example 2: Illustrative Management Assertion Regarding a Description of a Service Organization’s System, the
Suitability of the Design and Operating Effectiveness of Its Controls Relevant to the Privacy Principle and Its
Compliance with Commitments in Its Statement of Privacy Practices
Description Criteria
Example 2: Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report on a Description of a Service Organization’s System, the
Suitability of the Design and Operating Effectiveness of Its Controls Relevant to the Privacy Principle, and Its
Compliance with Commitments in Its Statement of Privacy Practices
Appendix D: Definitions
Appendix E: Reporting on Controls at a Cloud Computing Service Organization
Challenges Faced by the Cloud Service Organization in Meeting Users’ Information Needs
Risk Considerations When Performing a SOC 2 Engagement for a Cloud Service Organization
Engagement Acceptance Considerations for the Service Auditor
Cloud Security Frameworks 
1.01
Chapter 1
Introduction and Background
This chapter explains the relationship between a service organization and its user entities, provides
examples of service organizations, identifies the criteria that are used to evaluate the design and operating
effectiveness of controls at a service organization, explains the difference between a type 1 and type 2 service
auditor’s report, and presents three reporting options for practitioners reporting on controls at a service
organization.
Many entities function more efficiently and profitably by outsourcing tasks or entire functions to other
organizations that have the personnel, expertise, equipment or technology to accomplish these tasks or
functions. This Guide focuses on organizations that collect, process, transmit, store, organize, maintain or
dispose of information for other entities. In this Guide, organizations that operate information systems and
provide services to other entities are known as service organizations, and entities that use the services of service
organizations are known as user entities. Examples of the services provided by such service organizations are as
follows:
Cloud computing. Providing on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing
resources (for example, networks, servers, storage, applications, and services). (Additional information about
cloud computing is presented in Appendix E, “Reporting on Controls at a Cloud Computing Service
Organization.”)
Managed security. Managing access to networks and computing systems for user entities (for example,
granting access to a system and preventing, or detecting and mitigating system intrusion).
Financial services customer accounting. Processing financial transactions on behalf of customers of a bank
or investment company . Examples of this service are processing customer securities transactions, maintaining
customer account records, providing customers with confirmations of transactions and statements, and
providing these and related customer services through the Internet.
Customer support. Providing customers of user entities with online or telephonic post-sales support and
service management. Examples of these services are warranty inquiries and investigating and responding to
customer complaints.
Sales force automation. Providing and maintaining software to automate business tasks for user entities
that have a sales force. Examples of such tasks are order processing, information sharing, order
tracking, contact management, customer management, sales forecast analysis and employee
performance evaluation.
Health care claims management and processing. Providing medical providers, employers, and insured1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
parties of employers with systems that enable medical records and related health insurance claims to be
processed securely and confidentially .
Enterprise IT outsourcing services. Managing, operating, and maintaining user entities’ IT data centers,
infrastructure, and application systems and related functions that support IT activities, such as network,
production, security, change management, hardware and environmental control activities.
Management of a user entity is responsible for assessing and addressing risks faced by the user entity
related to financial reporting, compliance with laws and regulations and the efficiency and effectiveness of
operations. When a user entity engages a service organization to perform key processes or functions, the user
entity exposes itself to additional risks related to the service organization’s system. Although management of a
user entity can delegate tasks or functions to a service organization, the responsibility for the product or service
provided to customers of the user entity cannot be delegated. Management of the user entity is usually held
responsible by those charged with governance (for example, the board of directors), customers, shareholders,
regulators, and other affected parties for establishing effective internal control over outsourced functions.
To assess and address the risks associated with an outsourced service, management of the user entity
needs information about the service organization’s controls
1 over the system through which the services are
provided. When assessing controls at a service organization that may be relevant to and affect the services
provided to user entities, management of a user entity may ask the service organization for an auditor’s report
on the design and operating effectiveness of controls over the service organization’s system that may be relevant
to the security , availability , or processing integrity of the system (security , availability , processing integrity) or the
confidentiality or privacy of the information processed for user entities (confidentiality or privacy).
The Trust Services Principles and Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,
Confidentiality and Privacy (Trust Services Principles), contain the following definition of a system:
A system consists of five key components organized to achieve a specified objective. The five components are
categorized as follows:
Infrastructure. The physical and hardware components of a system (facilities, equipment and networks)
Software. The programs and operating software of a system (systems, applications and utilities)
People. The personnel involved in the operation and use of a system (developers, operators, users and
managers)
Procedures. The automated and manual procedures involved in the operation of a system
Data. The information used and supported by a system (transaction streams, files, databases and tables)
Handbook Section 5025 enables an auditor to report on subject matter other than financial statements.
Most of the assurance standards address specific subject matter, such as reporting on an entity’s compliance
with laws and regulations or on a financial forecast or projection. Handbook Section 5025 establishes a
framework for assurance engagements, other than audits of financial statements and other historical financial
information performed by practitioners, and for the ongoing development of related standards.
The Trust Services Principles provide criteria for evaluating and reporting on controls related to1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.07
1.08
1.09
security , availability , processing integrity , confidentiality and privacy . The five attributes of a system are known
as principles, and they are defined in paragraph .10 of Trust Services Principles as follows:
Security. The system is protected against unauthorized access (both physical and logical).
Availability. The system is available for operation and use as committed or agreed.
Processing integrity. System processing is complete, accurate, timely , and authorized.
Confidentiality. Information designated as confidential is protected as committed or agreed.
Privacy. Personal information
2 is collected, used, retained, disclosed, and destroyed3 in conformity
with the commitments in the entity’s privacy notice4 and with criteria set forth in generally accepted privacy
principles (GAPP) issued by the AICPA and CICA.5
The primary focus of this Guide is on examining and reporting on a description of a service
organization’s system and the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of its controls relevant to
security availability , processing integrity , confidentiality or privacy . Paragraphs 1.08–.09 describe two related
engagements and are included here to provide context and background for the engagement that is the primary
focus of this Guide.
Service Organization Control 3 Reports under Handbook Section
5025
The guidance provided in Trust Services Principles for performing and reporting on an audit
engagement using the trust services criteria is based on CICA Handbook Section 5025. A practitioner may
report on one or more of the five trust services principles (principles). In the audit report included in Trust
Services Principles, the practitioner expresses an opinion on whether the service organization maintained
effective controls over its system, in accordance with the criteria that are applicable to the principle(s) being
reported on. In this Guide, the audit engagement described in Trust Services Principles is known as a service
organization controls (SOC) 3 engagement, and the resulting report is known as a SOC 3 report. Although a
SOC 3 report is designed to meet the needs of a broad range of users, it does not contain a detailed description
of the service auditor’s tests of the operating effectiveness of controls and the results of those tests, which may
be necessary for a particular user to determine how it is affected by those controls.
SOC 1 Reports under CSAE 3416
Canadian Standard on Assurance Engagements (CSAE) 3416, Reporting on Controls at a Service
Organization, establishes the requirements and guidance for a practitioner auditing and reporting on a service
organization’s description of its system and its controls that are likely to be relevant to user entities’ internal
control over financial reporting. Service organizations frequently receive requests from user entities for these
reports because they are needed by the auditors of the user entities’ financial statements (user auditors) to
obtain information about controls at the service organization that may affect assertions in the user entities’1.10
1.11
1.12
1.13
financial statements. In this Guide, an engagement performed under CSAE 3416 is known as a SOC 1
engagement, and a report on that engagement is known as a SOC 1 report. SOC 1 reports are intended solely
for the information and use of existing user entities (for example, existing customers of the service organization),
their financial statement auditors, and management of the service organization.
SOC 2 Reports under Handbook Section 5025
Although CSAE 3416 is intended only for reporting on controls at a service organization that are likely
to be relevant to user entities’ internal control over financial reporting, paragraph .02 of CSAE 3416 indicates
that the guidance in CSAE 3416 may be helpful to a practitioner6 performing an engagement under Handbook
Section 5025, to report on a service organization’s controls other than those that are likely to be relevant to user
entities’ internal control over financial reporting. This Guide establishes guidance for such an engagement—
specifically , an audit engagement to report on controls at a service organization intended to mitigate risks related
to security , availability , processing integrity , confidentiality or privacy (trust services principles). In this Guide,
such an engagement is known as a SOC 2 engagement, and a report on that engagement is known as a SOC 2
report.
Trust Services Criteria
A service auditor may be engaged to report on a description of a service organization’s system and the
suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls relevant to one or more of the trust services
principles listed in paragraph 1.06. The decision about which principles the description will address is usually
made by management of the service organization and is often based on input from users.
In this Guide, the criteria in Trust Services Principles that are applicable to the principle(s) being
reported on are known as the applicable trust services criteria. In a SOC 2 report, the service auditor
expresses an opinion on the following:
Whether the description of the service organization’s system is fairly presented
Whether the controls are suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services
criteria would be met if the controls operated effectively
In type 2 reports (described in paragraph 1.16(a)), whether the controls were operating effectively to meet
the applicable trust services criteria
In engagements to report on the privacy principle, whether the service organization complied with the
commitments in its statement of privacy practices
The service auditor should determine that all the applicable trust services criteria have been included in
management’s description. For example, if a service auditor is reporting on the design and operating
effectiveness of controls at a service organization that are relevant to the security of user entities’ information, the
service auditor should determine that all the criteria in the set of trust services criteria related to security have1.14
1.15
1.16
1.
a.
been included in the description. The applicable trust services criteria for each principle are presented in
appendix B, “Trust Services Principles and Criteria for Security , Availability , Processing Integrity ,
Confidentiality and Privacy,” of this Guide.
If one or more applicable trust services criteria have been omitted from the description, the service
auditor should determine whether the description includes an explanation of why the criteria have been omitted
(to meet the criteria in paragraph 1.33(a)(ix)) and whether the applicable trust services criteria presented in the
description should be considered complete. Omission of an applicable trust services criterion is appropriate if
the omitted criterion is not applicable to the system that is the subject of the engagement. For example, consider
an engagement that addresses the privacy principle in which personal information is collected from individuals by
the user entities, not the service organization. In those circumstances, it would be appropriate for the service
organization to omit the criteria related to the collection of personal information and describe the reason for such
omission. However, the fact that a service organization has a policy or procedure to address certain applicable
trust services criteria does not serve as justification for omitting those criteria. For example, in a report that
addresses the privacy principle, it would not be appropriate for a service organization to omit criteria related to
the disclosure of personal information to third parties because the service organization’s policies forbid such
disclosure.
Unlike with a SOC 1 report, the primary users of SOC 2 reports generally are not user auditors but,
rather, management of the service organization and management of the user entities. SOC 2 reports are intended
to assist management of the user entities in carrying out their responsibility for monitoring the services provided
by a service organization. For example, controls at a service organization that provides Internet-based storage
of a user entity’s backup of proprietary information and trade secrets is unlikely to be of significance to the user
entity’s financial statement auditor. However, management of the user entity may be particularly concerned
about the security and confidentiality of the backed-up information. SOC 2 reports also may be useful to a user
entity’s internal auditors or practitioners reporting on a user entity’s security , availability , processing integrity ,
confidentiality or privacy . For example, a practitioner may be reporting on the privacy of the personal
information of customers of a user entity and on the user entity’s compliance with the commitments in its privacy
notice. The practitioner may use a SOC 2 report that addresses the privacy principle that has been provided by
the user entity’s service organization as part of the evidence needed to report on the privacy of the user entity’s
customers’ personal information.
Two Types of SOC 2 Reports
This Guide provides for the following two types7 of SOC 2 reports:
Report on management’s description of a service organization’s system and the suitability of the
design and operating effectiveness of controls (referred to in this Guide as a type 2 report). This is a
report that includes the following:
Management’s description of the service organization’s systemb.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
c.
i.
ii.
2.
a.
b.
i.
ii.
c.
A written assertion by management of the service organization
8 about whether, in all material
respects
management’s description of the service organization’s system fairly presents the service
organization’s system that was designed and implemented throughout the specified period,
based on the criteria in management’s assertion (which are the criteria in paragraphs
1.33–.34).
9
the controls stated in management’s description of the service organization’s system were
suitably designed throughout the specified period to meet the applicable trust services criteria
the controls stated in management’s description of the service organization’s system
operated effectively throughout the specified period to meet the applicable trust services criteria
when the service organization’s description of the system addresses the privacy principle,
management of the service organization complied with the commitments in its statement of
privacy practices throughout the specified period
A service auditor’s report that
expresses an opinion on the matters in (a)(ii)(1)–(4) when the report covers the privacy
principle
includes a description of the service auditor’s tests of controls and the results thereof, and
when the report addresses the privacy principle, a description of the service auditor’s tests of
the service organization’s compliance with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices
and the results thereof
Report on management’s description of a service organization’s system and the suitability of the
design of controls (referred to as a type 1 report). This is a report that includes the following:
Management’s description of the service organization’s system
A written assertion by management of the service organization
10 about whether, in all material
respects and based on suitable criteria
management’s description of the service organization’s system fairly presents the service
organization’s system that was designed and implemented as of a specified date, based on the
criteria in paragraphs 1.33–.34
the controls stated in the description were suitably designed to meet the applicable trust
services criteria as of a specified date
A service auditor’s report that expresses an opinion on the matters in (b)(ii)(1)–(2)
In both a type 1 and type 2 engagement, to clearly communicate that management is responsible for the
description of the service organization’s system; the suitability of the design of the controls; and in a type 2
report, the operating effectiveness of the controls, management’s written assertion is attached to the description
of the service organization’s system. When the report addresses the privacy principle, the statement of privacy
practices should be included in, or attached to, the description.
111.17
1.18
1.19
Difference between SOC 2 and SOC 3 Reports
Although SOC 2 and SOC 3 reports address similar subject matter and use the same criteria (the
criteria in Trust Services Principles), a SOC 2 report differs from a SOC 3 report in that a SOC 2 report
provides report users with the following report components that are not included in a SOC 3 report:
A description of the service organization’s system prepared by management of the service organization12
In a type 2 report, a description of the service auditor’s tests of the operating effectiveness of the service
organization’s controls and the results of those tests
In a type 2 report that addresses the privacy principle, a description of the service auditor’s tests of the
service organization’s compliance with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices and the results o
f
those tests
Another significant difference between a SOC 2 and SOC 3 report is that use of a SOC 2 report is
usually intended for specified parties who are knowledgeable about the following:
The nature of the service provided by the service organization
How the service organization’s system interacts with user entities, subservice organizations13 and other
parties
Internal control and its limitations
The applicable trust services criteria, the risks that may prevent those criteria from being met and how
controls address those risks
Complementary user-entity controls and how they interact with related controls at the service organization to
meet the applicable trust services criteria
A SOC 3 report, however, ordinarily is a general-use report, which means that management of the service
organization may provide the report to anyone. For that reason, management of a service organization may wish
to engage a service auditor to perform and report on a SOC 2 and SOC 3 engagement to meet the governance
needs of existing customers and market the service organization’s services to prospective customers, which is a
permitted use of a SOC 3 report. (See paragraph 1.19 for conditions that may preclude the service auditor
from issuing an unqualified opinion in a SOC 3 engagement.)
The work performed in a SOC 2 engagement may enable a service auditor to report on a SOC 3
engagement, as well. However, because a SOC 3 engagement requires that all the applicable trust services
criteria be met in order for the practitioner to issue an unqualified opinion, certain conditions would preclude the
service auditor from issuing an unqualified SOC 3 opinion. The following are examples of such situations:
An engagement in which the service organization has carved out subservice organizations from its system
description. Under Trust Services Principles, the scope of the engagement would need to include all
subservice organizations for which controls would need to be operating effectively to meet the applicable
trust services criteria.
An engagement in which complementary user-entity controls are significant to achieving the applicable trust
services criteria. (See paragraph 1.20 for a discussion of complementary user-entity controls.) An example1.20
1.21
1.22
1.23
would be a service organization that provides managed security services to user entities that require the user
entities to implement authentication procedures. Because the criteria cannot be entirely met by procedures
implemented at the service organization, an unqualified opinion could not be issued.
In many cases, the applicable trust services criteria stated in the description cannot be met by
implementing controls at a service organization alone and may require that user entities implement certain
controls (complementary user-entity controls). If the implementation of complementary user-entity controls is
necessary to meet specified applicable trust services criteria, the description should separately identify those
complementary user-entity controls, along with the criteria that cannot be met by the service organization’s
controls alone. An example of a complementary user-entity control is a system designed with the assumption
that user entities will have an authorized employee approve the accuracy of data prior to its submission to the
service organization for processing.
A SOC 2 engagement is not intended to supersede or replace a SOC 3 engagement. In many instances,
the detail in a description of a service organization’s system and in the service auditor’s description of tests of
controls is not needed by report users. In that case, a SOC 3 engagement may be a better option.
Trust Services Criteria for SOC 2 and SOC 3 Engagements and
Control Objectives for SOC 1 Engagements
In SOC 2 and SOC 3 engagements, the criteria used to evaluate whether controls were suitably
designed or operating effectively are the applicable trust services criteria. Accordingly , in every SOC 2 and
SOC 3 engagement that addresses the same principle(s), the criteria will be the same (the applicable trust
services criteria). However, in a SOC 1 engagement, the service auditor evaluates whether the service
organization’s controls were suitably designed or operating effectively by determining whether the control
objectives specified by management of the service organization were achieved.
14 CSAE 3416 requires that the
control objectives for a SOC 1 report be reasonable in the circumstances. Although most service organizations
providing like services will have similar control objectives, in order for control objectives to be reasonable in the
circumstances, they should reflect features of the particular service organization, such as the nature of the
services provided and the industries in which the user entities operate. Accordingly , in SOC 1 engagements, not
all service organizations will have the same control objectives.
Combining SOC 1 and SOC 2 Reports Not Permitted
A service organization’s controls may be relevant to a user entity’s internal control over financial
reporting and also to the trust services principles. This Guide is not intended to permit a SOC 2 report to be
issued that combines reporting on a service organization’s controls relevant to user entities’ internal control over
financial reporting with reporting on controls relevant to the trust services principles. A service organization may
engage a service auditor to separately perform an engagement that addresses a service organization’s controls1.24
related to user entities’ internal control over financial reporting. If a service auditor is engaged to perform both a
SOC 1 and SOC 2 engagement, certain testing performed in either engagement may provide evidence for the
other engagement.
Comparison of SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3 Engagements and Related
Reports
The following table identifies differences between SOC 1, SOC 2, and SOC 3 reports:
SOC 1 Reports SOC 2 Reports SOC 3 Reports
Under what professional
standard is the
engagement performed?
Canadian Standard on
Assurance Engagements
(CSAE) 3416, Reporting
on Controls at a Service
Organization
Handbook – Assurance
Section 5025, Standards
For Assurance
Engagements Other
Than Audits of Financial
Statements and Other
Historical Financial
Information
Handbook - Assurance
Section 5025, Standards
For Assurance
Engagements Other Than
Audits of Financial
Statements and Other
Historical Financial
Information
What additional
guidance is relevant?
The CPA Canada Guide,
Service Organizations –
Applying CSAE 3416,
Reporting on Controls at
a Service Organization.
The CPA Canada Guide,
Reporting on Controls at
a Service Organization
Relevant to Security,
Availability, Processing
Integrity, Confidentiality
or Privacy.
Trust Services Principles,
Criteria, and Illustrations
for Security, Availability,
Processing Integrity,
Confidentiality and
Privacy provides the
criteria for evaluating the
design and operating
effectiveness of controls in
these engagements, as well
as the criteria for the
content of a privacy notice.
What is the subject
matter of the
engagement?
Controls at a service
organization relevant to
user entities’ internal
control over financial
reporting.
Controls at a service
organization relevant to
security , availability ,
processing integrity ,
confidentiality or privacy.
If the report addresses the
privacy principle, the
service organization’s
compliance with the
commitments in its
statement of privacy
practices.
Controls at a service
organization relevant to
security, availability,
processing integrity ,
confidentiality or privacy.
If the report addresses the
privacy principle, the
service organization’s
compliance with the
commitments in its privacy
notice.
15What is the purpose of
the  re port?
To provide the auditor of a
user entity’s financial
statements with
information and a
practitioner’s opinion
about controls at a service
organization that may be
relevant to a user entity’s
internal control over
financial reporting. It
enables the user auditor to
perform risk assessment
procedures and, if a type 2
report is provided, to use
the report as audit
evidence that controls at
the service organization
are operating effectively .
To provide management of
a service organization, user
entities, and other
specified parties with
information and a
practitioner’s opinion
about controls at the
service organization
relevant to security,
availability , processing
integrity, confidentiality or
privacy .
A type 2 report that
addresses the privacy
principle also provides
information and a
practitioner’s opinion
about the service
organization’s compliance
with the commitments in its
statement of privacy
practices.
To provide interested
parties with a practitioner’s
opinion about controls at
the service organization
relevant to security,
availability , processing
integrity, confidentiality or
privacy .
A report that addresses the
privacy principle also
provides a practitioner’s
opinion about the service
organization’s compliance
with the commitments in its
privacy notice.
What are the
components of the
re port?
A description of the
service organization’s
system.
A written assertion by
management of the service
organization regarding the
description of the service
organization’s system; the
suitability of the design of
the controls; and, in a type
2 report, the operating
effectiveness of the
controls in achieving the
specified control
objectives.
A service auditor’s report
that contains
16 an opinion
on the fairness of the
presentation of the
description of the service
organization’s system; the
suitability of the design of
the controls to achieve
A description of the
service organization’s
system.
A written assertion by
management of the service
organization regarding the
description of the service
organization’s system; the
suitability of the design of
the controls; and, in a type
2 report, the operating
effectiveness of the
controls in meeting the
applicable trust services
criteria. If the report
addresses the privacy
principle, the assertion also
covers the service
organization’s compliance
with the commitments in its
statement of privacy
practices.
A service auditor’s report
A description of the system
and its boundaries
18 or, in
the case of a report that
addresses the privacy
principle, a copy of the
service organization’s
privacy notice.
A written assertion by
management of the service
organization regarding the
effectiveness of controls in
meeting the applicable trust
services criteria and, if the
report addresses the
privacy principle,
compliance with the
commitments in the service
organization’s privacy
notice.
A service auditor’s report
on whether the entity
maintained effective
controls over its system asspecified control
objectives; and, in a type 2
report, the operating
effectiveness of those
controls.
In a type 2 report, a
description of the service
auditor’s tests of the
controls and the results of
the tests.
that contains
17 an opinion
on the fairness of the
presentation of the
description of the service
organization’s system; the
suitability of the design of
the controls to meet the
applicable trust services
criteria; and, in a type 2
report, the operating
effectiveness of those
controls.
If the report addresses the
privacy principle, the
service auditor’s opinion
on whether the service
organization complied with
the commitments in its
statement of privacy
practices.
In a type 2 report, a
description of the service
auditor’s tests of controls
and the results of the tests.
In a type 2 report that
addresses the privacy
principle, a description of
the service auditor’s tests
of the service
organization’s compliance
with the commitments in its
statement of privacy
practices and the results of
those tests.
it relates to the principle
being reported on (that is,
security, availability,
processing integrity ,
confidentiality or privacy),
based on the applicable
trust services criteria.
If the report addresses the
privacy principle, the
service auditor’s opinion
on whether the service
organization complied with
the commitments in its
privacy notice.
Who are the intended
user s of the r epor t?
Management of the service
organization; user entities
during some or all of the
period covered by the
report (for type 2 reports)
and user entities as of a
specified date (for type 1
reports); and auditors of
the user entities’ financial
statements.
Management of the service
organization and other
specified parties who have
sufficient knowledge and
understanding of the
following:
The nature of the
service provided by the
service organization
How the service
organization’s system
interacts with user
Anyone1.25
1.26
entities, subservice
organizations, and other
parties
Internal control and its
limitations
Complementary user-
entity controls and how
they interact with
related controls at the
service organization to
meet the applicable
trust services criteria
The applicable trust
services criteria
The risks that may
threaten the
achievement of the
applicable trust services
criteria and how
controls address those
risks
Boundaries of the System
In addition to the differences identified in the table in paragraph 1.24, SOC 1 engagements differ from
SOC 2 engagements in other areas. For example, the boundaries of the systems addressed in SOC 2
engagements may be less apparent than the systems addressed in SOC 1 engagements, which address financial
reporting systems or parts thereof. For that reason, the boundaries of a system addressed by a SOC 2
engagement need to be clearly understood, defined, and communicated. For example, a financial reporting
system is likely to be bounded by the components of the system related to financial transaction initiation,
authorization, recording, processing and reporting. Whereas the boundaries of a system related to processing
integrity (system processing is complete, accurate, timely and authorized) may extend to other operations (for
example, processes at customer call centers).
In a SOC 2 engagement that addresses the privacy principle, the system boundaries cover, at a
minimum, all the system components as they relate to the personal information life cycle, which consists of the
collection, use, retention, disclosure, and disposal or anonymization of personal information within well-defined
processes and informal ad hoc procedures, such as emailing personal information to an actuary for retirement
benefit calculations. The system boundaries would also include instances in which the personal information is
combined with other information (for example, in a database or system), a process that would not otherwise
cause the other information to be included in the scope of the engagement. That notwithstanding, the scope of a
privacy engagement may be restricted to a business unit (online book sales) or geographical location (Canadian
operations), as long as the personal information is not commingled with information from, or shared with, other
business units or geographical locations.1.27
1.28
1.29
1.30
Risks Addressed by Controls
Because of differences in the subject matter of SOC 1 and SOC 2 reports and the needs of intended
report users, the risks and the controls that address those risks are likely to differ in SOC 1 and SOC 2
engagements. For example, in a SOC 1 engagement, controls over changes to application programs would
typically focus on risks related to unauthorized changes to the programs that could affect the financial reporting
process. In a SOC 2 engagement that addresses the processing integrity principle, controls over program
changes might need to cover the risks of unauthorized changes to a much broader range of application programs
(for example, customer service applications and manufacturing process control applications).
Meaning of the Term Security
The term security may be interpreted more narrowly in a SOC 1 engagement than in a SOC 2
engagement. For example, security in a SOC 1 engagement generally relates to the authorization of transactions
and protection of the integrity of those transactions throughout the financial reporting process. In a SOC 1
engagement, protection of such information from unauthorized read access or disclosure may not be a concern.
However, in a SOC 2 engagement that addresses the privacy or confidentiality principle, the term security
relates to the authorization of transactions and protection of the integrity of those transactions throughout the
system and also protection of personal and other information from unauthorized use or disclosure from the time
it is collected until the time it is disposed of. In a SOC 2 engagement that addresses the availability principle, the
term security may also relate to the protection of the system from interruptions in processing availability .
Difference between Privacy and Security
Some individuals consider effective privacy practices to be the same as effective information security .
However, privacy encompasses a much broader set of activities beyond security that contribute to the
effectiveness of a privacy program, including, for example, providing users with the following:
Notice of the service organization’s privacy commitments and practices
Choice regarding the use and disclosure of their personal information
Access to their personal information for review and update
An inquiry , complaint and dispute resolution process19
Type 1 or Type 2 SOC 2 Reports
Because management of a user entity is responsible for assessing risks to the user entity and establishing
and maintaining controls that address those risks, management of the user entity will need information about the
design and operating effectiveness of controls at the service organization that affect the service provided to the
user entity . A type 1 report does not include tests of the operating effectiveness of controls and the results
thereof; therefore, it is unlikely to provide users with sufficient information to assess the effectiveness of controls1.31
1.32
1.33
1.
a.
b.
i.
at the service organization that address risks related to the outsourced service. However, a type 1 report may
be useful to a user entity in understanding the service organization’s system and controls. The following are
circumstances in which a type 1 report may be useful:
The service organization has not been in operation for a sufficient length of time to enable the service auditor
to gather sufficient appropriate evidence regarding the operating effectiveness of controls.
The service organization has recently made significant changes to the system and related controls and does
not have a sufficient history with a stable system to enable a type 2 engagement to be performed.
Because of the limitations of a type 1 engagement, a service auditor may recommend that, in such situations, a
type 2 engagement covering a short period (for example, two months) be performed, rather than a type 1
engagement.
A service auditor’s report may not include both a type 1 opinion for certain applicable trust services
criteria and controls and a type 2 opinion for other applicable trust services criteria and controls. The service
auditor is engaged to perform either a type 1 or type 2 engagement.
Contents of a SOC 2 Report
A type 2 SOC 220 report contains the service auditor’s opinion about whether
management’s description of the service organization’s system is fairly presented (see paragraphs 1.33–.34).
the controls included in the description are suitably designed to meet the applicable trust services criteria
stated in management’s description (see paragraph 1.35).
the controls included in the description were operating effectively to meet the applicable trust services criteria
(see paragraph 1.36).
for SOC 2 reports that address the privacy principle, management complied with the commitments in its
statement of privacy practices throughout the specified period (see paragraph 1.37). (Management’s
statement of privacy practices should be included in, or attached to, management’s description of the service
organization’s system.)
Criteria for Evaluating the Fairness of the Presentation of the
Description
The criteria for determining whether the description of the service organization’s system is fairly
presented are as follows:
The description contains the following information:
The types of services provided
The components of the system used to provide the services, which are the following:
Infrastructure. The physical and hardware components of a system (facilities, equipmentii.
iii.
iv.
v.
c.
d.
e.
f.
i.
ii.
g.
i.
ii.
h.
i.
ii.
j.
k.
l.
2.
and networks).
Software. The programs and operating software of a system (systems, applications and
utilities).
People. The personnel involved in the operation and use of a system (developers,
operators, users and managers).
Procedures. The automated and manual procedures involved in the operation of a system.
Data. The information used and supported by a system (transaction streams, files,
databases and tables).
The boundaries or aspects of the system covered by the description
How the service organization’s system captures and addresses significant events and
conditions
21
The process used to prepare and deliver reports and other information to user entities and other
parties
For information provided to, or received from, subservice organizations and other parties
how the information is provided or received and the role of the subservice organizations
and other parties
the procedures the service organization performs to determine that such information and its
processing, maintenance, and storage are subject to appropriate controls
For each principle being reported on, the related criteria in Trust Services Principles
(applicable trust services criteria) and the related controls designed to meet those criteria, including,
as applicable, the following:
Complementary user-entity controls contemplated in the design of the service
organization’s system
When the inclusive method is used to present a subservice organization, controls at the
subservice organization
If the service organization presents the subservice organization using the carve-out method
the nature of the services provided by the subservice organization
each of the applicable trust services criteria that are intended to be met by controls at the
subservice organization (alone or in combination with controls at the service organization) and
the types of controls expected to be implemented at carved-out subservice organizations to
meet those criteria
Any applicable trust services criteria that are not addressed by a control and the reasons
therefore
Other aspects of the service organization’s control environment, risk assessment process,
information and communication systems and monitoring of controls that are relevant to the services
provided and the applicable trust services criteria
In the case of a type 2 report, relevant details of changes to the service organization’s system
during the period covered by the description
The description does not omit or distort information relevant to the service organization’s system1.34
1.
2.
3.
a.
b.
4.
5.
a.
b.
c.
d.
while acknowledging that the description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range of users
and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the system that each individual user may consider
important to its own particular needs.
If the description addresses controls over privacy , in addition to the criteria in paragraph 1.33 for
determining whether the description of the service organization’s system is fairly presented, the description
should also include the following information:
The types of personal information collected from individuals or obtained from user entities or other
parties
22 and how such information is collected and, if collected by user entities, how it is obtained by the
service organization
The process for (i) identifying specific requirements in agreements with user entities and in laws and
regulations applicable to the personal information and (ii) implementing controls and practices to meet
those requirements
If the service organization presents the subservice organization by using the carve-out method
any aspects of the personal information life cycle for which responsibility has been delegated to
the subservice organization
the types of activities the subservice organization would need to perform to comply with the
service organization’s privacy commitments
If the service organization provides the privacy notice to individuals about whom personal information
is collected, used, retained, disclosed, and disposed of or anonymized, the privacy notice prepared in
conformity with the relevant criteria for a privacy notice set forth in Trust Services Principles
If the user entities, rather than the service organization, are responsible for providing the privacy
notice to individuals, a statement regarding how the privacy notice is communicated to individuals, that the
user entities are responsible for communicating such notice to individuals, and that the service organization
is responsible for communicating its privacy practices to the user entities in its statement of privacy
practices, which includes the following information:
A summary of the significant privacy and related security requirements common to most
agreements between the service organization and its user entities and any requirements in a particular
user entity’s agreement that the service organization meets for all or most user entities
A summary of the significant privacy and related security requirements mandated by law,
regulation, an industry or a market that are not included in user entity agreements but that the service
organization meets for all or most user entities
The purposes, uses, and disclosures of personal information as permitted by user-entity
agreements and beyond those permitted by such agreements but not prohibited by such agreements
and the service organization’s commitments regarding the purpose, use and disclosure of personal
information that are prohibited by such agreements
A statement that the information will be retained for a period no longer than necessary to fulfille.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
6.
1.35
1.36
1.37
1.38
the stated purposes or contractual requirements or for the period required by law or regulation, as
applicable, or a statement describing other retention practices
A statement that the information will be disposed of in a manner that prevents loss, theft, misuse
or unauthorized access to the information
If applicable, how the service organization supports any process permitted by user entities for
individuals to obtain access to their information to review, update or correct it
If applicable, a description of the process to determine that personal information is accurate and
complete and how the service organization implements correction processes permitted by user
entities
If applicable, how inquiries, complaints and disputes from individuals (whether directly from the
individual or indirectly through user entities) regarding their personal information are handled by the
service organization
A statement regarding the existence of a written security program and what industry or other
standards it is based on
Other relevant information related to privacy practices deemed appropriate for user entities by
the service organization
If the user entities, rather than the service organization, are responsible for providing the privacy
notice to individuals, the service organization’s statement of privacy practices.
The criterion for determining whether controls are suitably designed is that the controls identified in the
description would, if operating as described, provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services
criteria would be met.
The criterion for determining whether the controls identified in the description of the service
organization’s system operated effectively to meet the applicable trust services criterion is that the controls were
consistently operated as designed throughout the specified period, including whether manual controls were
applied by individuals who have the appropriate competence and authority .
In an engagement that addresses the privacy principle, the criterion for determining whether a service
organization complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices is that the service organization
collected, used, retained, disclosed and disposed of or anonymized personal information in conformity with the
commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
A service organization may request that the service auditor’s report address additional subject matter
that is not specifically covered by the criteria in this Guide. An example of such subject matter is the service
organization’s compliance with certain criteria based on regulatory requirements or compliance with
performance criteria established in a service-level agreement. In order for a service auditor to report on such
additional subject matter, the service organization provides the following:
An appropriate supplemental description of the subject matter
A description of the criteria used to measure and present the subject matter1.39
1.40
1.41
1
2
3
4
If the criteria are related to controls, a description of the controls intended to meet the control-related criteria
An assertion by management regarding the additional subject matter
The service auditor should perform appropriate procedures related to the additional subject matter, in
accordance with Handbook Section 5025 and the relevant guidance in this Guide. The service auditor’s
description of the scope of the work and related opinion on the subject matter should be presented in separate
paragraphs of the service auditor’s report. In addition, based on the agreement with the service organization, the
service auditor may include additional tests performed and detailed results of those tests in a separate
attachment to the report.
Applying Certain Auditing Standards
The following Canadian Auditing Standards (CASs) sections relate to audits of financial statements;
however, when relevant, they may be adapted and applied in performing a SOC 2 engagement:
CAS 315 Identifying and Assessing the Risks of Material Misstatement through Understanding the
Entity and Its Environment
CAS 240 The Auditor’ s Responsibilities Relating to Fraud in an Audit of Financial Statements
CAS 610 Using the Work of Internal Auditors
CAS 530 Audit Sampling
CAS 560 Subsequent Events
Definitions
Definitions of the terms used in this Guide are included in Appendix D, “Definitions,” of this Guide.
These definitions are similar to the definitions in CSAE 3416; however, certain differences exist due to the
difference in the subject matter addressed by SOC 1 and SOC 2 engagements.
In this Guide, controls are policies and procedures that enable an entity to meet specified criteria.
Personal information is information that is about or can be related to an identifiable individual.
Collection, use, retention, disclosure, and disposal or anonymization are the aspects of the personal information life cycle.
Entities that collect personal information generally establish and document their policies regarding the nature of the information they collect
and how that information will be used, retained, disclosed and disposed of or anonymized. These policies and the entity’s commitment to adhere
to them when included in a written communication to individuals about whom personal information is collected (sometimes referred to as data
subjects) are referred to as a privacy notice. A privacy notice also includes information about such matters as the purpose of collecting the
information; the choices individuals have related to their personal information; the security of such information; and how individuals can contact
the entity with inquiries, complaints, and disputes related to their personal information. When a user entity collects personal  information from
individuals, it typically provides a privacy notice to those individuals.
When a service organization is involved in any of the phases of the personal information life cycle, it may or may not be responsible for providing
a privacy notice to the individuals about whom information is collected. If the user entity is responsible for providing the privacy notice, the
service organization provides a statement of privacy practices to the user entities that includes the same types of policies an d commitments as
would be included in a privacy notice, but the statement is written from the perspective of the service organization communicating its privacy-
related policies and commitments to the user entities. The statement of privacy practices provides a basis for the user entitie s to prepare a
privacy notice to be sent to individuals or for ensuring that the service organization has appropriate practices for meeting the existing privacy
commitments of user entities.5
6
7
8
a.
b.
c.
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
The criteria for the content of a statement of privacy practices are set forth in paragraphs 1.33–.34 of this Guide.
In the assurance standards, a Chartered Accountant (CA) / Chartered Professional Accountant (CPA) performing an assurance engagement
ordinarily is referred to as a practitioner. CSAE 3416 uses the term service auditor, rather than practitioner, to refer to a CA/CPA reporting on
controls at a service organization, as does this Guide.
CSAE 3416 provides for the same two types of reports, but the subject matter is controls that may be relevant to user entities’  internal
control over financial reporting.
Paragraphs .05 and .59 of Handbook Section 5025 indicate that a practitioner should obtain a written assertion in an attest engagement.
Paragraph .73 also notes that, in an attest engagement, an auditor may provide a reservation of opinion if:
the assertion prepared by management does not present fairly the criteria used;
the assertion prepared by management does not present fairly the conformity of the subject matter with the criteria; or
essential information has not been presented or has been presented in an inappropriate manner.
These criteria are also included in Appendix A, “Information for Management of a Service Organization,” of this Guide.
See footnote 8.
The criteria for a service organization’s statement of privacy practices are presented in Appendix A of this Guide. In a type 1 and type 2
report, the service auditor’s opinion on the fairness of the presentation of the description of the service organization’s syst em also addresses the
fairness of the presentation of the service organization’s statement of privacy practices.
In a type 2 report, the service auditor expresses an opinion on the service organization’s compliance with the commitments in its statement of
privacy practices. In a type 1 report, the service auditor does not express such an opinion.
In a SOC 3 report, management provides a description of the service organization’s system and its boundaries. Typically, this description is
less detailed than the description in a SOC 2 report. Also, the practitioner does not express an opinion on the fairness of the  presentation of the
description.
In this Guide, a subservice organization is defined as a service organization used by another service organization to perform services related to
the trust services principles. If a service organization uses a subservice organization, the description of the service organization’s system may
either (a) include the subservice organization’s services, using the inclusive method, or (b) exclude the subservice organization’s services, using the
carve-out method.
CSAE 3416 defines control objectives as the aim or purpose of specified controls at the service organization.
See the second paragraph of footnote 4 in this chapter for an explanation of the difference between a privacy notice and a statement of privacy
practices.
Paragraph 52 of CSAE 3416 “Preparing the Service Auditor’s Report”, list the contents of the service auditor’s report.
Paragraphs 59 to 80 of Handbook Section 5025 describes the reporting standards which apply to SOC 2 and SOC 3 engagements.
These descriptions are typically less detailed than the descriptions in SOC 1 or SOC 2 reports and are not covered by the pract itioner’s
opinion.
A definition of privacy and a further description of these activities are included in generally accepted privacy principles
Paragraph 4.02 of this Guide, provides the minimum reporting requirements from Section 5025 paragraph 62.
For example, the setup of access rights for new users of the system.
An example of an entity that collects personal information from user entities is a credit reporting bureau that maintains information about the
creditworthiness of individuals.2.01
2.02
Chapter 2
Planning a Service Auditor’s Engagement
In planning a service auditor’s engagement, management of the service organization and the service auditor each
have specific responsibilities. This chapter describes the matters to be considered and procedures to be
performed by the service auditor in planning the engagement. Appendix A, “Information for Management of a
Service Organization,” of this Guide identifies management’s responsibilities in a service auditor ’s engagement.
Responsibilities of Management of a Service Organization
When undergoing an audit of a description of a service organization’s system and the design and
operating effectiveness of controls, as described in this Guide, management of a service organization is
responsible for the following:
Preparing a description of the service organization’s system.
Providing a written assertion.
Determining the type of engagement to be performed; which principle(s) are addressed in the engagement;
the scope of the engagement; and whether any subservice organizations will be included in, or carved out of,
the description and service auditor’s report.
Providing written representations at the conclusion of the engagement. When the inclusive method is used,
management of the service organization and management of the subservice organization agree to provide and
do provide such representations.
Having a reasonable basis for its assertion.
Responsibilities of the Service Auditor
During planning, the service auditor is responsible for the following:
Determining whether to accept or continue an engagement. Before undertaking an assurance engagement, the
practitioner should have a reasonable basis for believing the engagement can be completed in accordance
with the standards in Handbook Section 5025.
Reading the description of the service organization’s system and obtaining an understanding of the system.
Identifying and developing criteria that are suitable for evaluating the subject matter.
Establishing an understanding with management of the service organization, which ordinarily is documented in
an engagement letter, regarding the services to be performed and the responsibilities of management and the2.03
1.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
2.
3.
a.
b.
c.
2.04
1.
2.
service auditor.
Engagement Acceptance and Continuance
A service auditor should accept or continue an engagement to report on controls at a service
organization only if
the service auditor has the capabilities and competence to perform the engagement. Having relevant
capabilities and competence to perform the engagement includes having
adequate technical training and proficiency to perform an assurance engagement;
adequate knowledge of the subject matter;
reason to believe that the subject matter is capable of evaluation against criteria that are
appropriate for the intended use;
knowledge of the service organization’s industry and business;
appropriate knowledge of systems and technology;
experience evaluating risks related to the suitability of the design of controls; and
experience evaluating the design of manual and IT controls related to the selected trust services
principles, performing tests of such controls, and evaluating the results of the tests.
the service auditor is independent in mental attitude in all matters relating to the engagement and
exercises due care and with an objective state of mind.
the service auditor’s preliminary knowledge of the engagement circumstances indicates that
the criteria to be used will be suitable and available to the intended users of the report,
1
the service auditor will have access to sufficient and appropriate evidence to the extent
necessary to conduct the engagement, and
the scope of the engagement and management’s description of the service organization’s system
will not be so limited that they are unlikely to be useful to the intended users of the report. If the
inclusive method is used, these conditions also apply with respect to the subservice organization.
Before accepting an engagement, the service auditor should consider the requirements under the
Canadian Standard on Quality Control (CSQC) 1, Quality Control for Firms That Perform Audits and
Reviews of Financial Statements, and Other Assurance Engagements. More specifically , practitioners can
consider the requirements in paragraphs 26 through 28. Paragraph 26 of CSQC 1 states the following.
The firm shall establish policies and procedures for the acceptance and continuance of client relationships and
specific engagements, designed to provide the firm with reasonable assurance that it will only undertake or
continue relationships and engagements where the firm:
Is competent to perform the engagement and has the capabilities, including time and resources,
to do so;
Can comply with relevant ethical requirements; and3.
2.05
2.06
2.07
2.08
2.09
2.10
Has considered the integrity of the client, and does not have information that would lead it to
conclude that the client lacks integrity.
The service auditor may obtain information about the matters in paragraph 2.04 by communicating with
a predecessor service auditor, if any , regarding the reasons for change in service auditors, any disagreements
between the predecessor auditor and service organization, and similar matters. The guidance in paragraph A18-
A20 of CSQC 1 may be adapted and applied for this purpose. If the predecessor service auditor has issued a
service auditor’s report, it is not necessary for the service auditor to review the predecessor service auditor’s
working papers because of the detailed nature of the report.
As stated in paragraph 2.03(b), the service auditor should accept or continue an engagement to report
on controls at a service organization only if the service auditor is independent of the service organization.
Handbook paragraph 5025.24 requires that the assurance engagement should be performed with due care and
with an objective state of mind. Independence is required by the Independence Standards — Harmonized Rule
of Professional Conduct 204. Examples of relevant matters to consider when assessing independence are the
scope of other services provided to the service organization, fee arrangements for all services, firm and
individual financial relationships, firm business relationships and alumni and familial relationships with the client
and client personnel.
Rule 204 provides the following definition of an audit client: “audit client” means an entity in respect of
which a member or firm has been engaged to perform an audit of the financial statements. In the application of
Rule 204.4(1) to (12) “audit client” includes its related entities, and the reference to an assurance client, a client
or an entity that is an audit client shall be read as including all related entities of the assurance client, client or
entity as the case may be. Based on this definition, when management’s description uses the inclusive method to
present a subservice organization, the subservice organization would be considered a client because the service
auditor has performed professional services with respect to the subservice organization. Consequently , the
service auditor should be independent of the subservice organization.
The service auditor need not be independent of the users of the service organization.
Additional matters that are relevant when determining whether to accept or continue an engagement
include the scope of the system being reported on, the functions performed by the system, how subservice
organizations are used, how information about subservice organizations will be presented, the relevance of the
trust services principle being reported on to the system, and the period covered by the report. Consideration
should be given to these matters to determine whether the resulting report will be useful and not misleading to
users of the report. For example, assume that management of the service organization wishes to engage the
service auditor to perform a type 2 audit for a period of less than two months. In those circumstances, the
service auditor should consider whether a report covering that period will be useful to users of the report,
particularly if many of the controls related to the applicable trust services criteria are performed on a monthly or
quarterly basis.
Another matter that the service auditor should consider when determining whether to accept or continue2.11
2.12
2.13
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
a.
b.
c.
2.14
2.15
a service organization controls (SOC) 2 engagement is the intended users of the report. If the intended report
users are unlikely to understand the nature of the engagement or the tests and results (for example, acceptable
deviation rates or substantive tests versus tests of controls), a greater potential exists for the report to be
misunderstood.
The service auditor may also consider whether management has realistic expectations about the
engagement, particularly if it is likely that the report may require a qualification or other modification.
A service auditor may question accepting an engagement in which a service organization functions
primarily as an intermediary between the user entities and subservice organization and performs few or no
functions related to the service provided to user entities. If a service organization’s controls do not contribute to
meeting the applicable trust services criteria, a report on that service organization’s controls is not likely to be
useful to report users.
A service auditor ordinarily should accept or continue an engagement to report on controls at a service
organization only if management of the service organization acknowledges and accepts responsibility for the
following:
Preparing its description of the service organization’s system and its assertion, including the
completeness, accuracy , and method of presentation of the description and assertion
Providing a written assertion that will be attached to management’s description of the service
organization’s system and provided to users
Having a reasonable basis for its assertion
Designing, implementing, and documenting controls that are suitably designed and operating
effectively to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services criteria are met
Providing the service auditor with the following:
Access to all information, such as records and documentation, including service level
agreements, of which management is aware that is relevant to the description of the service
organization’s system and the assertion
Additional information that the service auditor may request from management for the purpose of
the audit engagement
Unrestricted access to personnel within the service organization from whom the service auditor
determines it is necessary to obtain evidence relevant to the service auditor’s engagement
In preparing for an engagement in which the inclusive method will be used to present a subservice
organization, the service auditor should obtain from the service organization written acknowledgement and
acceptance by the subservice organization of its responsibility for the matters in paragraph 2.13.
When the inclusive method is used, the requirements and guidance in paragraphs 2.01–.14 also apply
with respect to the subservice organization. Accordingly , during planning, the service auditor determines whether
it will be possible to obtain an assertion from management of the subservice organization and evidence that
supports the service auditor’s opinion on the subservice organization’s description of its system and the2.16
1.
2.
3.
4.
2.17
suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of the subservice organization’s controls, including written
representations from management of the subservice organization. If the subservice organization will not provide
a written assertion and appropriate written representations, the service organization will be unable to use the
inclusive method but may be able to use the carve-out method. Additional guidance on the inclusive method is
provided in paragraphs 3.26–.28 of this Guide.
Planning to Use the Work of the Internal Audit Function
The phrase using the work of the internal audit function was derived from CPA Canada
Handbook – Assurance Section 5050. Using The Work Of Internal Audit in Assurance Engagements
Other Than Audits Of Financial Statements And Other Historical Financial Information. Paragraph 14 of
Section 5050 states that the practitioner would normally co-ordinate his or her work with the internal audit at as
early a stage as possible when planning. The practitioner would obtain agreement from internal audit, in advance
of the engagement, on matters such as:
the objectives, scope and timing of specific internal audit work;
the extent of testing;
the documentation of work performed; and
the review and reporting procedures.
The practitioner would also need to be advised of, and have access to, relevant internal audit reports and be
kept informed of any significant matters that come to the attention of internal audit, which may affect the
practitioner’s work. Similarly , the practitioner would normally inform internal audit of any significant matters
arising in the course of the engagement that may affect internal audit work.
Canadian Auditing Standard (CAS) 610 Using The Work of Internal Auditors refers to work designed and
performed by the internal audit function. This includes tests of controls designed and performed by the internal
audit function during the period covered by the type 2 report and the results of those tests. This differs from
work that the internal audit function performs to provide direct assistance to the service auditor, including
assistance in performing tests of controls that are designed by the service auditor and performed by members of
the internal audit function under the direction, supervision and review of the service auditor.
If the service organization has an internal audit function, the service auditor may obtain an understanding
of the responsibilities and activities of the internal audit function to determine whether the work of the internal
audit function is likely to be relevant to the engagement. The service auditor may obtain this understanding by
making inquiries of appropriate management of the service organization and internal audit personnel. Examples
of matters that may be important to this understanding are the internal audit function’s
organizational status within the service organization;
application of, and adherence to, professional standards;
audit plan, including the nature, timing and extent of audit procedures; and
access to records and whether limitations exist on the scope of the internal audit function’s activities.1.
2.
3.
4.
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.21
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Handbook Section 5050 requires that, if the practitioner plans to use the work of internal audit, the practitioner
should assess the internal audit function. In assessing the internal audit function, the practitioner would consider
the following factors:
2
Organizational status
Scope of the function
Knowledge and competence
Due care
Work of the internal audit function that provides information or evidence about the fairness of the
presentation of the description of the service organization’s system, the suitability of the design of the controls,
or the operating effectiveness of the controls that pertain to the trust services principle being reported on would
be considered relevant to the engagement. The following are examples of information that may assist the service
auditor in assessing the relevance of that work:
Knowledge gained from prior-year audits related to the principle being reported on
How management and the internal audit function assess risk related to the trust services principle being
reported on and how audit resources are allocated to address those risks
Certain internal audit activities may not be relevant to a SOC 2 engagement (for example, the internal
audit function’s evaluation of the efficiency of certain management decision-making processes).
If, after obtaining an understanding of the internal audit function, the service auditor concludes that (a)
the activities of the internal audit function are not relevant to the trust services principle being reported on, or (b)
it may not be efficient to consider the work of the internal audit function, the service auditor does not need to
give further consideration to the work of the internal audit function.
If the service auditor intends to use the work of the internal audit function or use internal audit personnel
in a direct assistance capacity , the service auditor should assess the internal audit function. The practitioner may
determine whether the work performed by the internal audit function is likely to be adequate for the purposes of
the engagement by evaluating the following:
The objectivity and technical competence of the members of the internal audit function
Whether the work of the internal audit function is likely to be carried out with due professional care
Whether it is likely that effective communication will occur between the internal audit function and
service auditor, including consideration of the effect of any constraints or restrictions placed on the internal
audit function by the service organization
Whether the internal audit function is independent on the matters subject to audit and the results of
internal audit work are reported to senior management and the audit committe. or equivalent and
recommendations are acted upon
Whether there are scope constraints placed on the internal audit function’s ability to gain access to
important systems, units or activities of the entity , or to the information or key personnel relevant to
particular internal audit work2.22
1.
2.
3.
2.23
1.
2.
3.
4.
2.24
2.25
2.26
If the service auditor determines that the work of the internal audit function is likely to be adequate for
the purposes of the engagement, the servce auditor should evaluate the following factors in determining the
planned effect that the work of the internal audit function will have on the nature, timing and extent of the servce
auditor’s procedures:
The nature and scope of specific work performed or to be performed by the internal audit function
The significance of that work to the service auditor’s conclusions
The degree of subjectivity involved in the evaluation of the evidence gathered in support of those
conclusions
Materiality
When planning and performing a SOC 2 engagement, the service auditor should evaluate materiality
with respect to:
The fair presentation of management’s description of the service organization’s system;
The suitability of the design of the controls;
In a type 2 engagement, the operating effectiveness of the controls; and
In a type 2 engagement that addresses the privacy principle, the service organization’s compliance
with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
The concept of materiality takes into account that the report is intended to provide information to meet the
common information needs of a broad range of users who understand the manner in which the system is being
used. Materiality with respect to the service organization also applies to the subservice organization.
Materiality with respect to the fair presentation of management’s description of the service
organization’s system and with respect to the design of controls primarily includes the consideration of
qualitative factors. For example, whether:
management’s description of the service organization’s system includes the significant aspects of system
processing.
management’s description of the service organization’s system omits or distorts relevant information.
the controls have the ability , as designed, to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services
criteria stated in management’s description of the service organization’s system would be met.
Materiality with respect to the operating effectiveness of controls includes the consideration of both
quantitative and qualitative factors (for example, the service auditor’s tolerable rate and observed rate of
deviation in the results of tests [a quantitative matter] and the nature and cause of any observed deviations [a
qualitative matter]).
The concept of materiality is not applicable when disclosing in the description of tests of controls (and
tests of compliance with privacy commitments, if applicable) the results of those tests for which deviations have
been identified. This is because a deviation may have significance for a specific user entity beyond whether, in
the opinion of the service auditor, it prevents a control from operating effectively . For example, the control to2.27
2.28
2.29
1
2
which the deviation relates may be particularly significant in preventing a certain type of error, the results of
which may be material to a particular user entity but not other users.
Identifying Deviations
Before the service auditor begins tests of controls and tests of compliance, the service auditor should
determine the procedures that will be performed and the circumstances under which a test result will be
considered a deviation, so that all such results are reported as deviations in the description of tests of controls
and tests of compliance.
Establishing an Understanding with the Client
Paragraph .09 of Canadian Auditing Standard (CAS) 210, Agreeing the Terms of Audit
Engagements, requires that “the auditor shall agree the terms of the audit engagement with management or
those charged with governance, as appropriate.. A documented understanding of the terms of engagement
reduces the risk that either the service auditor or management of the service organization will misinterpret the
needs or expectations of the other party . For example, a documented understanding reduces the risk that
management of the service organization will rely on the service auditor to protect the service organization from
certain risks or perform certain management functions that are not part of the service auditor’s responsibilities in
a SOC 2 engagement.
The engagement letter typically includes the objectives of the engagement, a description of the services
to be provided, the responsibilities of management of the service organization, the responsibilities of the service
auditor, and the limitations of the engagement. Such matters as fees and timing may also be addressed in the
engagement letter. If the service auditor believes that an understanding has not been established with
management of the service organization, the service auditor would typically decline to accept or continue the
engagement.
Practitioner should refer to Handbook Section 5025, paragraph 40, 41, 42 when identifying, developing and considering criteria
Refer to paragraph 10 and 11 of Handbook Section 5050 for additional information.3.01
3.02
Chapter 3
Performing the Engagement
This chapter identifies matters that the service auditor considers and procedures that the service auditor
performs to test (1) the fairness of the presentation of management’s description of the service organization’s
system; (2) the suitability of the design of the controls included in the description; (3) in a type 2 report, the
operating effectiveness of the controls included in the description; and (4) in a type 2 service organization
controls (SOC) 2 engagement that addresses the privacy principle, whether the service organization complied
with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
Obtaining and Evaluating Evidence about Whether the Description of
the System Is Fairly Presented
The service auditor should read the description of the service organization’s system and perform
procedures to determine whether the description is fairly presented. A description that is fairly presented should:
meet the criteria in paragraphs 1.33–.34 of this Guide.
describe the system as it was designed and implemented.
include relevant details of changes to the system.
The procedures that the service auditor may perform to evaluate whether the description of the service
organization’s system is fairly presented typically include a combination of the following:
Reading contracts and service level agreements with user entities to understand the nature and scope of the
service provided by the service organization, as well as the service organization’s contractual obligations to
user entities
Obtaining an understanding of the aspects of laws or regulations relevant to the services provided
Observing the procedures performed by service organization personnel
Reading service organization policy and procedure manuals and other documentation of the system (for
example, flowcharts, narratives and software and hardware asset management records)
Performing walkthroughs of control activity-related policies and procedures and observing other system
components
Obtaining a list of user entities and determining how the services provided by the service organization are
likely to affect the user entities (for example, determining the predominant type(s) of user entities, whether
they are regulated entities and the common types of services provided to the user entities)3.03
3.04
3.05
3.06
Discussing with management and other service organization personnel the content of management’s assertion
and the description of the service organization’s system
Reading reports of the internal audit function relevant to the principle being reported on
A conclusion that a description of a service organization’s system is fairly presented does not imply that
the controls included in the description are suitably designed or operating effectively to meet the applicable trust
services criteria.
In determining whether the description of a service organization’s system is fairly presented, the service
auditor evaluates whether each control as presented provides sufficient information for users to understand how
that control may affect the particular user. The description of a control generally will need to include the
following information:
Relevant Information When Describing a Control Example
The frequency with which the control is performed or the
timing of its occurrence
Management reviews error reports on a monthly basis.
On a daily basis, a departmental clerk reviews
reconciling items identified in the comparison of the ABC
report with the data feed from user entities.
The party responsible for performing the control The security manager reviews…
An input processing clerk compares…
The nature of the activity that is performed The system compares the name of the user-entity
employee requesting access to the system with approved
user information submitted by authorized user-entity
personnel.
Service organization department managers review the list
of service organization personnel who have access to the
system for appropriateness of access on a monthly basis
and evidence this review with a sign-off.
The subject matter to which the control is applied Program changes are reviewed by…
In determining whether the description of the service organization’s system is fairly presented, the
service auditor compares his or her understanding of the service provided and the system through which it is
provided with the description of the service organization’s system, as they relate to the trust services principle(s)
being reported on. The description is considered fairly presented if it includes the information required by
paragraphs 1.33–.34 of this Guide, does not omit or distort information relevant to users, and objectively
describes what actually occurs at the service organization.
The description is not fairly presented if it states or implies that system elements exist that do not exist, if
it states or implies that controls are being performed when they are not being performed, or if it inadvertently or3.07
3.08
3.09
3.10
3.11
3.12
intentionally omits or distorts relevant system information.
Additionally , a description that is fairly presented should not contain statements that cannot be
objectively evaluated. For example, describing a service organization as being the “world’s best” or “most
respected in the industry” is subjective and, therefore, would not be appropriate for inclusion in a description of
the service organization’s system.
As part of the service auditor’s evaluation of whether the description materially omits information
relevant to users, the service auditor determines whether the description addresses all the major aspects of the
system within the scope of the engagement. An example of an omission would be failing to include in the
description significant aspects of the processing performed at another location that is included in the scope of the
engagement.
A service organization may have controls that it considers to be outside the boundaries of the system,
such as controls related to the conversion of new user entities to the service organization’s systems. To avoid
misunderstanding by users, the service auditor considers whether the description clearly delineates the
boundaries of the system that are included in the scope of the engagement.
When performing a type 2 engagement, the service auditor should inquire about changes in the service
organization’s system, such as changes in controls that were implemented during the period covered by the
service auditor’s report. (If the report addresses the privacy principle, this would include changes in the service
organization’s privacy practices.) If the service auditor believes that the changes would be considered significant
by users, the service auditor should determine whether the changes have been included in the description of the
service organization’s system at an appropriate level of detail, including the date the change occurred and how
the system differed before and after the change. If the changes relate to privacy practices, they would be
included in the description of the service organization’s system or the service organization’s statement of privacy
practices. If management has not included such changes in the description, the service auditor should ask
management to amend the description to include this information. If management refuses to include this
information in the description, the service auditor considers the effect of such changes on his or her conclusions
regarding the fairness of the presentation of management’s description of the service organization’s system and
the service auditor’s report.
In evaluating which aspects of the service organization’s system are relevant and should be included in
the description of the service organization’s system, the service auditor considers the common information needs
of the broad range of users for whom the report is intended.
Paragraphs 1.33–.34 of this Guide present the information to be included in management’s description
of the service organization’s system. Paragraph 1.33(a)(x) requires the description to include aspects of the
service organization’s internal control other than its control activities if they are relevant to meeting the applicable
trust services criteria (for example, aspects of the control environment). If these aspects relate to meeting a
specific criterion, they should be included in the description of the specific controls designed to meet that
criterion.3.13
3.14
3.15
3.16
Evaluating Whether Controls Have Been Implemented
To be fairly presented, the description of the service organization’s system should include only controls
that have been implemented. Controls that have been implemented have been placed in operation versus existing
only in the description. The service auditor should determine whether the controls included in management’s
description of the service organization’s system have been implemented by performing an inquiry in combination
with other procedures. Such other procedures may include observation, inspection of records and other
documentation of the manner in which the service organization’s system operates and controls are applied, and
reperformance of the control.
The service auditor’s procedures to determine whether the controls included in the description have
been implemented may be similar to, and performed in conjunction with, procedures to obtain an understanding
of the system and the system’s boundaries. For example, when performing a walkthrough to verify the service
auditor’s understanding of the design of controls, the service auditor may also determine whether controls have
been implemented as stated in the description of the service organization’s system. Performing a walkthrough
entails asking relevant members of the service organization’s management and staff to describe and demonstrate
their actions in performing a procedure. In performing a walkthrough, the service auditor follows a system,
event, or activity from origination through the service organization’s processes, including its information systems,
until its final disposition, using the same documents and IT that service organization personnel use. Walkthrough
procedures usually include a combination of inquiry , observation, inspection of relevant documentation (that is,
corroboration) and reperformance of controls. It may be helpful to use flowcharts, questionnaires, or decision
tables to facilitate understanding the design of the controls.
If the service auditor determines that certain controls identified in management’s description have not
been implemented, the service auditor should ask management of the service organization to delete those
controls from the description. The service auditor considers only controls that have been implemented when
assessing the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls. Paragraph 4.22 of this Guide
presents an illustrative paragraph that would be added to the service auditor’s report when the description
includes controls that have not been implemented.
Other Information in the Description That Is Not Covered by the
Service Auditor’s Report
A service organization may wish to provide report users with information, other than the information
required by paragraphs 1.33–.34 of this Guide that will not be covered by the service auditor’s report.
Examples of such information are pending changes to the system and regulatory matters. Such other information
should be distinguished from the service organization’s description of its system by excluding the information
from the description. If the other information is attached to the description or included in a document that
contains the description of the service organization’s system and the service auditor’s report, the other
information should be differentiated from the information covered by the service auditor’s report, for example,3.17
3.18
3.19
3.20
through the use of a title such as “Other Information Provided by Example Service Organization That Is Not
Covered by the Service Auditor’s Report.”
When other information that is not covered by the service auditor’s report is attached to the description
or included in a document containing the description and the service auditor’s report, the service auditor should
apply the requirements and guidance in paragraphs .40 and ,41 of CSAE 3416, which requires the service
auditor to read the other information and identify any material inconsistencies, such as an apparent misstatement
of fact. Ordinarily , the service auditor would discuss such inconsistencies with management of the service
organization, and if management refuses to correct the information, the service auditor should determine which
of the actions described in paragraphs A60 of CSAE 3416 are appropriate.
The service auditor may wish to emphasize that the other information is not a part of the description of
the service organization’s system and is not covered by the service auditor’s report. In these instances, the
service auditor may include a paragraph in the report describing the other information and stating that the service
auditor’s report does not address the other information. Paragraph 4.27 of this Guide presents an example of
such a paragraph.
Materiality Relating to the Fair Presentation of the Description
The service auditor should consider materiality when evaluating the fair presentation of the description of
the service organization’s system. Materiality in this context primarily relates to qualitative factors, such as
whether significant aspects of the system and processing have been included in the description or whether
relevant information has been omitted or distorted.
The following are some examples of how the service auditor might consider materiality when evaluating
whether the description of a service organization’s system is fairly presented:
Example Service Organization uses a subservice organization to perform all of its back-office functions and
elects to use the carve-out method of presentation. Management’s description of the service organization’s
system includes information about the nature of the services provided by the subservice organization and
describes the service organization’s monitoring and other controls that the service organization implements
with respect to the processing performed by the subservice organization. In this example, the description of
the service organization’s system should include such information because it is likely to be relevant to users
and, therefore, would be considered material to the description.
A service auditor is reporting on Example Service Organization’s controls related to the security principle.
Example Service Organization uses a separate facility for its off-site storage of backup tapes. Data written to
the backup tapes is encrypted, and Example Service Organization’s description includes information about its
controls over the encryption of the information. The description does not include information about controls
over physical access to the separate facility . Controls over physical access would be intended to meet the
following trust services criterion: procedures exist to restrict physical access to the defined system, including,3.21
3.22
3.23
3.24
but not limited to, facilities; backup media; and other system components, such as firewalls, routers and
servers. In this example, such an omission is not likely to be material to users because controls over the
encryption of the tapes prevent unauthorized access to the information and compensate for the omission of
controls over physical access to the facility .
Complementary User-Entity Controls
A service organization may design its services on the assumption that certain controls will be
implemented by the user entities. If such complementary user-entity controls are necessary to meet certain
applicable trust services criteria, the service auditor evaluates whether the service organization’s description
adequately describes the complementary user-entity controls and their importance in meeting the applicable trust
services criteria to which they relate.
To evaluate whether complementary user-entity controls included in the description are adequately
described, the service auditor compares the information in the description with documents such as contracts
with user entities and system or procedure manuals and makes inquiries of service organization personnel to gain
an understanding of the user entities’ responsibilities for achieving the applicable trust services criteria and
whether those responsibilities are appropriately described in the description.
For example, if the service organization manages logical security for the user entities and provides
access to its system based on user-entity authorization, the following trust services criterion could not be met
without the implementation of controls at the user entities because access authorization rests with them:
procedures exist to restrict logical access to the defined system, including, but not limited to, registration and
authorization of new users. Accordingly , in addition to describing the relevant controls performed by the service
organization, the description would include information, such as the following, alerting user entities to the need
for a complementary user-entity control: user entities are responsible for implementing controls over the
authorization of access to the system by employees of the user entity and for communicating to the service
organization user registration and access information in a timely manner.
Subservice Organizations
Management of the service organization should determine whether controls over the functions
performed by an organization from which it has contracted services (that is, a vendor) are needed to meet one
of more of the trust services criteria or are otherwise relevant to the fair presentation of the description of the
service organization’s system. If so, the vendor is considered a subservice organization, and the service
organization’s description of its system should include (depending on whether the inclusive or carve-out method
is used) the information set forth in paragraphs 3.26 and 3.29. For each subservice organization, the service
organization determines whether to use the inclusive method of presentation, as described in paragraphs 3.26-
.28, or the carve-out method of presentation, as described in paragraph 3.29. The service auditor should obtain
an understanding of the significant vendors whose services affect the service organization’s system and assess3.25
3.26
3.27
whether management has made an appropriate determination about whether these vendors are subservice
organizations. Paragraphs 4.37–.39 of this Guide present illustrative report paragraphs marked to show the
changes that would be made to those paragraphs when using the carve-out method. (The illustrative report
paragraphs in paragraph 4.39 of this Guide show the changes that would be made to the report if the service
organization were to use the carve-out method, and the service auditor is denying a conclusion.) Paragraph 4.40
of this Guide presents an illustrative report marked to show the changes that would be made to the report if the
inclusive method were used.
In evaluating services provided by a vendor, the service organization should assess whether controls at
the service organization alone or the service organization’s monitoring of the effectiveness of controls at the
vendor enable the applicable trust services criteria affected by those services to be met. Examples of monitoring
the effectiveness of a vendor’s controls include tests of the vendor’s controls performed by the service
organization’s internal audit function, review and approval of vendor output, periodic visits to the vendor and
assessments, and review of reports on assurance engagements that address the vendor’s services and controls.
In these instances, the service organization does not need to treat the vendor as a subservice organization, omits
from the description information about controls at the vendor, and omits any description of the effect the
vendor’s controls may have on meeting the applicable trust services criteria. When a service organization has
determined that its controls alone meet the applicable trust services criteria or that its monitoring of the vendor’s
controls is sufficient to meet the related criteria, the service auditor evaluates this determination as part of the
evaluation of the suitability of the design of the controls in meeting the applicable trust services criteria, and tests
the operating effectiveness of such controls or the monitoring performed by the subservice organization.
For the purposes of this Guide, under the inclusive method, the relevant aspects of the subservice
organization’s infrastructure, software, people, procedures and data are to be considered a part of the service
organization’s system and would be included in the description of the service organization’s system. Although
these relevant aspects would be considered a part of the service organization’s system, the portions of the
system that are attributable to the subservice organization should be separately identified.
When the inclusive method is used, the guidance set forth in this Guide also applies to the services
provided by the subservice organization to the extent they affect the service organization’s ability to meet the
applicable trust services criteria, including the following:
Obtaining acknowledgement and acceptance of responsibility for the matters in paragraph 2.13 of this Guide
from management of the subservice organization
Obtaining an understanding of the portion of the system provided by the subservice organization
Obtaining and evaluating evidence about the fairness of the presentation of the description for the portions of
the system provided by the subservice organization
Obtaining evidence about whether the described controls have been implemented at the subservice
organization
Evaluating the suitability of the design of controls at the subservice organization
For a type 2 report, obtaining evidence of the operating effectiveness of controls at the subservice
organization3.28
3.29
3.30
3.31
Obtaining evidence of the subservice organization’s compliance with the privacy commitments it has made to
the service organization, if applicable
For a type 2 report, obtaining a written assertion addressing the matters in paragraph 1.16(a)(ii)(1)–(4) of
this Guide that are relevant to the services provided by the subservice organization, and for a type 1 report,
the matters in paragraph 1.16(b)(ii)(1)–(2) of this Guide
Obtaining written representations about the matters in paragraph 3.90 that are relevant to the services
provided by the subservice organization
When the inclusive method is used, the service auditor should
evaluate whether the description of the service organization’s system, including the relevant aspects of the
system provided by the subservice organization, is fairly presented.
evaluate the suitability of the design of the controls at the subservice organization.
for a type 2 report, perform tests of the operating effectiveness of those controls.
when the report addresses the privacy principle, test the subservice organization’s compliance with the
commitments in the service organization’s statement of privacy practices.
If the service organization uses the carve-out method to present a subservice organization, the
description of the service organization’s system identifies the following:
The nature of the services provided by the subservice organization
If the description addresses the privacy principle, any aspects of the personal-information life cycle for which
responsibility has been delegated to the subservice organization, if applicable
Each of the applicable trust services criteria that are intended to be met by controls at the subservice
organization alone or in combination with controls at the service organization
The types of controls expected to be implemented at carved-out subservice organizations that are necessary
to meet the applicable trust services criteria, either alone or in combination with controls at the service
organization
If the description addresses the privacy principle, the types of activities that the subservice organization would
need to perform to comply with the service organization’s privacy commitments
The description of the service organization’s system and the service auditor’s engagement exclude all other
aspects of the subservice organization’s infrastructure, software, people, procedures, and data relevant to the
services provided (see additional considerations in paragraphs 3.37–.39).
A service organization may use multiple subservice organizations and prepare its description using the
carve-out method of presentation for one or more subservice organizations and the inclusive method of
presentation for others.
Paragraph 4.23 of this Guide presents an illustrative paragraph that would be added to the service
auditor’s report when the service organization uses a subservice organization but refuses to disclose that fact
and the functions that the subservice organization performs.3.32
3.33
3.34
Changes in the Scope of the Engagement
Management of the service organization may request a change in the scope of the engagement prior to
the completion of the engagement (for example, a change in the trust services principles to be covered, the
services that the service organization provides [for example, discontinuing a particular service], the boundaries
of the service organization’s system, the components of the system, or the use of the inclusive or carve-out
method for subservice organizations). When management requests such a change in scope, the service auditor
should be satisfied, before agreeing to the change, that a reasonable justification for the change exists.
Reasonable justification may include the following:
Changes in the needs of users of the reports
Identification of additional system components or expansion of the boundaries of the system to be included in
the description to improve the fairness of the presentation of the description
Determination that certain system components are not relevant to the services provided
Determination that certain services are not relevant to users
The inability to arrange for the service auditor’s access to a subservice organization
Generally , increases in the scope of the engagement are likely to have a reasonable justification. A request to
decrease the scope of the engagement may not have a reasonable justification if, for example, the request is
made
to exclude portions of the system because of the likelihood that the service auditor’s opinion would be
modified with respect to those portions of the system.
to prevent the disclosure of deviations identified at a subservice organization by requesting a change from the
inclusive method to the carve-out method.
When a service auditor determines that a request to change the scope of an engagement derives from
intent by a responsible party (for example, management of the service organization or a subservice organization)
to conceal information relevant to the user, such as deficiencies in the operating effectiveness of a control, the
service auditor should take appropriate action, which may include adding a paragraph to his or her report,
denying a conclusion, or withdrawing from the engagement. If the request to change the scope of the
engagement derives from refusal by management of the subservice organization to provide a written assertion or
written representations, after having agreed to do so, the service auditor should express a reservation in the for
m
of a qualification of conclusion or denial of conclusion when the practitioner is unable to obtain sufficient
appropriate audit evidence regarding the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls at the
subservice organization.
Evaluating the Suitability of the Design of Controls
A control is suitably designed if, individually or in combination with other controls, it would, when
complied with satisfactorily , provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services criteria would be
met. The trust services criteria for a SOC 2 engagement are included in Appendix B, “Trust Services Principles3.35
3.36
3.37
3.38
and Criteria for Security , Availability , Processing Integrity , Confidentiality and Privacy ,” of this Guide. In
assessing whether controls are suitably designed, the service auditor considers the following:
The events and circumstances that might prevent the applicable trust services criteria from being met
Whether the controls, if operating effectively , would prevent, or detect and correct, those events and
circumstances
The service auditor uses the information and evidence obtained in determining whether the description of
the service organization’s system is fairly presented to evaluate the suitability of the design of controls and
obtains additional evidence by performing procedures that may include the following:
Inquiry of service organization personnel regarding the operation of controls and the types of errors that
occur
Inspection of documents produced by the system
Performing additional walkthroughs of control-activity-related policies and procedures
Reading system documentation
A control may meet more than one criterion or multiple controls may be needed to meet a single
criterion. If a combination of controls is needed to meet one or more criteria, the service auditor considers the
combination of controls jointly.
If the service organization uses the carve-out method for a subservice organization, the service auditor
also evaluates whether the types of controls expected to be implemented at the carved-out subservice
organization that are necessary to meet specified applicable trust services criteria (either alone or in combination
with controls at the service organization) would, if operating effectively , meet the specified applicable trust
services criteria. The service auditor also considers whether evidence exists that the subservice organization is
aware of the service organization’s requirements with regard to these types of controls and whether there is any
evidence that weaknesses exist in the suitability of the design or operating effectiveness of controls at the
subservice organization. Examples of procedures that may be performed to obtain such evidence include the
following:
Reading contracts with the subservice organization to determine whether they identify the types of controls
expected to be implemented at the subservice organization
Obtaining an understanding of the procedures in place at the service organization to evaluate and monitor the
implementation, suitability of design and operating effectiveness of the controls at the subservice organization
(for example, evaluation of a service auditor’s report on the description of the subservice organization’s
system prepared using this Guide or testing performed at the subservice organization by service organization
personnel)
Obtaining and evaluating a type 2 report on the subservice organization’s system prepared using this Guide
The service auditor considers whether the services provided by the subservice organization are of such
a nature that the use of the carve-out method prevents the description from being fairly presented and causes the
description to be misleading to users. The service auditor considers the extent to which
important system functions necessary for understanding the system are performed by the subservice3.39
3.40
3.41
organization.
controls at the subservice organization are necessary to meet the applicable trust services criteria.
the service organization’s compliance with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices is dependent
on the subservice organization’s compliance with those commitments.
Factors to consider in making this determination include the following:
The number of applicable trust services criteria that would not be met if the types of controls expected to be
implemented at the carved-out subservice organization that are necessary to meet the criteria, either alone or
in combination with controls at the service organization, were not implemented
The complexity of the services and the types of controls that would be expected to be implemented by the
subservice organization
The complexity of the interaction of the service organization and subservice organization.
The ability of the service auditor to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence regarding controls at the service
organization affected by controls at the carved-out subservice organization.
If the service auditor determines that the effect of the types of controls expected to be implemented at
the subservice organization in meeting the applicable trust services criteria is pervasive, and the description of
the service organization’s system when presented using the carve-out method is misleading to users, the service
auditor may
suggest to management that the scope of the engagement be changed to the inclusive method.
add additional material to the scope paragraph of the service auditor’s report explaining the nature and extent
of the effect of the subservice organization on the service organization (for example, the nature and extent of
the service organization’s dependence on the subservice organization).
add a paragraph to the service auditor’s report denying a conclusion on the suitability of the design and
operating effectiveness of controls at the subservice organization that are necessary , in combination with
controls at the service organization, to meet the specified applicable trust services criteria, due to the service
auditor’s inability to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence regarding the suitability of the design and operating
effectiveness of controls at the subservice organization.
denial of conclusion on all of the matters covered by the service auditor’s report.
Paragraph 4.39 of this Guide presents a paragraph that would be added to the service auditor’s report when
denying a conclusion in these circumstances, as well as the disclaimer language that replaces the opinion
paragraph.
The service auditor should consider materiality with respect to the suitability of the design of controls
primarily by considering qualitative factors, such as whether the controls have the ability , as designed, to provide
reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services criteria would be met, and quantitative factors, such as
the maximum rate of control failure that is acceptable to the service organization and whether that rate is less
than the service auditor’s tolerable rate of deviation.
In evaluating the suitability of the design of controls, the service auditor considers the effect of the3.42
3.43
3.44
3.45
3.46
3.47
3.48
control environment and other components of the service organization’s internal control on the ability of the
controls to meet the applicable trust services criteria.
A service organization’s controls may vary , depending on the nature of the information processed or the
manner in which it is transmitted. For example, user entities may submit information to a service organization by
mail, phone, fax or Internet. Controls over the capture of that information may vary depending on the method by
which the information is submitted. In order for a specified criterion to be met, the service organization’s
controls would need to address all the significant variations.
A service organization that has multiple controls that each independently meet a particular criterion may
choose to include only one of the controls in the description. If the service auditor determines that the described
control is not suitably designed to meet a particular criterion and becomes aware of one or more other controls
that are suitably designed to meet the criterion, the service auditor should ask management to revise the
description to include the additional control(s).
After performing the procedures and considering the guidance in paragraphs 3.34–.43, the service
auditor considers whether the controls have the ability , as designed, to provide reasonable assurance that the
applicable trust services criteria are met.
Paragraphs 4.29–4.30 and 4.32 of this Guide present illustrative paragraphs that would be added to
the service auditor’s report when the service auditor determines that controls are not suitably designed to meet
one or more of the applicable trust services criteria.
Obtaining Evidence Regarding the Operating Effectiveness of
Controls in a Type 2 Engagement
When performing a type 2 engagement, the service auditor should test the operating effectiveness of the
controls stated in management’s description of the service organization’s system that are necessary to meet the
applicable trust services criteria throughout the period covered by the service auditor’s report. The service
auditor is responsible for determining the nature, timing, and extent of the procedures to be performed in
evaluating whether the controls are operating effectively.
From the viewpoint of the service auditor, a control is operating effectively if it functions as intended
throughout the period. When the service organization uses the inclusive method, the service auditor considers
the controls at both the service organization and subservice organization.
A control may be designed to address an identified risk on its own or may function in combination with
another control. For example, when a supervisor reviews and approves a user’s credentials prior to providing
the user with access to the system, the manual control (review and approval of the user’s credentials) may be
complemented by a system’s application control requiring that a supervisor acknowledge his or her review and
approval by entering a sign-off in the system prior to providing access to the system. In this instance, both the3.49
3.50
3.51
3.52
3.53
manual and automated controls would be tested by the service auditor because the two controls are dependent
on one another.
The service auditor should consider materiality when evaluating whether controls are operating with
sufficient effectiveness to meet the applicable trust services criteria. Materiality with respect to the operating
effectiveness of controls includes the consideration of the following:
Quantitative factors, such as the tolerable rate of deviation and the observed rate of deviation. (In this Guide,
the tolerable rate of deviation is the maximum rate of deviations in the operation of the prescribed control
that the service auditor is willing to accept without modifying the opinion relating to one or more applicable
trust services criteria.)
Qualitative factors (for example, the nature and cause of any identified deviations).
If the service organization implemented changes to its controls during the period covered by the service
auditor’s report, and the superseded controls could be relevant to meeting one or more applicable trust services
criteria during a portion of the period covered by the service auditor’s report, the superseded controls should be
included in the population of controls to be tested. If the service organization has used the inclusive method, the
service auditor considers changes to controls at both the service organization and subservice organization.
Designing and Performing Tests of Controls
When determining the nature, timing, and extent of tests of controls to be performed to obtain evidence
of the operating effectiveness of controls, the service auditor considers the type of evidence that can be obtaine
d
about the performance of the control and how long that evidence will be available. The service auditor also
considers whether a particular control is designed to meet one or more criteria on its own or in combination with
other controls. If a combination of controls is necessary to meet a given criteria, those controls are considered
together, and deviations are evaluated together. The service auditor also considers the risk that the control will
not operate effectively.
The service organization’s control environment or other components of internal control related to the
service provided to user entities may enhance or mitigate the effectiveness of specific controls. If the service
auditor determines that certain aspects of the control environment or other components of internal control are
not effective, the service auditor generally would obtain more convincing evidence of the operating effectiveness
of the specific controls to determine whether the related trust services criteria have been met. In some situations,
the service auditor may conclude that controls are not operating effectively to meet certain related trust services
criteria because of deficiencies in the control environment or other components of internal control.
For example, consider a service organization that determines bonuses based on zero processing errors.
In this environment, service organization personnel may be tempted to suppress the reporting of errors in order
to receive bonuses. The service auditor may decide to increase the testing of controls that prevent, or detect an
d3.54
1.
a.
b.
c.
2.
3.
3.55
3.56
3.57
correct, errors in system processing (for example, reconciliations of input to output designed to identify
exceptions) or, perhaps, may even test the entire population to determine whether controls are operating
effectively to meet the applicable trust services criteria.
Nature of Tests of Controls
When designing and performing tests of controls, the service auditor
makes inquiries and performs other procedures to obtain evidence about the following:
How the control was applied. (Was the control performed as designed?)
The consistency with which the control was applied throughout the period.
By whom or by what means the control was applied. (Is the control automated or manual? Has
there been high turnover in the position, and is the control being performed by an inexperienced
person?)
determines whether the controls to be tested depend on other controls and, if so, whether it is
necessary to obtain evidence supporting the operating effectiveness of those other controls.
determines an effective method for selecting the items to be tested to meet the objectives of the
procedure.
The other procedures that the service auditor should perform in combination with an inquiry to obtain
evidence about the operating effectiveness of controls include the following:
Observation of the application of the control
Inspection of documents, reports, or electronic files that contain evidence of the performance of the controls,
such as system log files
Reperformance of the control
Inquiry alone usually does not provide sufficient appropriate evidence of the operating effectiveness of
controls. Some tests of controls provide more convincing evidence of the operating effectiveness of controls
than others. Performing an inquiry combined with inspection or reperformance ordinarily provides more
convincing evidence than performing an inquiry and observation.
Evidence of the operating effectiveness of controls may be lost, misplaced, or inadvertently deleted by
the service organization. In such instances, the service auditor determines whether other evidence of the
operating effectiveness of the control exists and whether the results of tests of the other evidence would provide
sufficient appropriate evidence. If not, the service auditor should modify the report.
Paragraph 4.34 of this Guide presents an illustrative paragraph that would be added to the service auditor’s
report when a scope limitation exists that prevents the service auditor from obtaining evidence about the
operating effectiveness of controls.3.58
3.59
3.60
3.61
3.62
When information produced by the service organization’s information system is provided to the service
auditor as a source for testing, the service auditor should obtain evidence about the validity , completeness, and
accuracy of that information. For example, the service organization might provide the service auditor with a
quarterly system-generated report of user access to the system that is reviewed by management for
appropriateness of access based on assigned job responsibilities. In testing management’s review, the service
auditor evaluates whether the report is complete and accurate, based on the user-access rules for the system.
Testing Controls at an Interim Date
The service auditor may perform tests of controls at interim dates, after the audit period end data or at
the end of the audit report date. The following are some relevant factors to be considered when determining the
timing of tests of controls:
The nature of the controls
The period of time during which the information will be available (for example, electronic files may be
overwritten after a period of time or hard copy records may not be retained)
Whether testing requires direct observation of a procedure that is only performed at certain times during the
audit period
Whether the control leaves evidence of its operation and, if not, whether the control must be tested through
observation
Performing procedures at an interim date may assist management of the service organization in
identifying deficiencies in the design or operating effectiveness of controls at an early stage in the audit and
provides the service organization with an opportunity to correct the deficiencies for the remainder of the audit
period. Paragraph 4.32 of this Guide contains an illustrative paragraph that would be added to the service
auditor’s report if the service auditor concludes that controls were not suitably designed to meet an applicable
trust services criterion during a portion of the period under audit.
When the service auditor performs tests of the operating effectiveness of controls at an interim date, the
service auditor should determine what additional testing is necessary for the remaining period.
Extent of Tests of Controls
The service auditor should design and perform tests of controls to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence
that the controls are operating effectively throughout the period to meet the applicable trust services criteria.
Relevant factors in determining the extent of tests of controls include the following:
The nature of the controls
The frequency of the performance of the control during the period (for example, daily management review of
open incidents versus monthly review of closed incidents to identify ongoing problems)
The relevance and reliability of the evidence that can be obtained to support the conclusion that the controls3.63
3.64
3.65
3.66
are operating effectively to meet the applicable trust services criteria
The extent to which audit evidence is obtained from tests of other controls designed to meet the same
criterion
The service organization’s maximum acceptable rate of control failure
The service auditor’s tolerable rate of deviation in the operating effectiveness of the control
If the control operates frequently , the service auditor should consider using audit sampling to obtain
reasonable assurance about the operating effectiveness of the control. If the control is applied on a periodic
basis (for example, a monthly reconciliation of input to output), the service auditor should consider guidance
appropriate for testing smaller populations. Refer further to Canadian Auditing Standards (CAS) 530 Audit
Sampling.
The service auditor should test the operating effectiveness of the control in effect throughout the period
covered by the report and determine whether the control has operated frequently enough to be assessed as
operating effectively . For example, if a report covers a period of six months, and a control operates only
annually , the service auditor may be unable to test the operating effectiveness of the control within the period.
The shorter the test period, the greater the risk that certain controls may not have operated during the period
and that the service auditor will be unable to perform sufficient testing and obtain sufficient evidence to express
an opinion on the operating effectiveness of those controls.
Generally , evidence obtained in prior engagements about the satisfactory operation of controls in prior
periods does not provide a basis for a reduction in testing in the current audit period, even if it is supplemented
with evidence obtained during the current period. If the service auditor plans to use evidence about the
operating effectiveness of controls obtained in prior engagements, the service auditor should adapt and apply the
guidance in paragraph .14 of Canadian Auditing Standards (CAS) 330 The Auditor’ s Responses to Assessed
Risks, which requires the service auditor to obtain evidence about whether changes in those specific controls
have occurred subsequent to the previous audit, by performing inquiry combined with observation or inspection
to confirm the understanding of those specific controls. The service auditor should perform procedures to
establish the continuing relevance of evidence obtained in prior periods when the service auditor plans to use
such evidence in the current period. For example, in performing the prior audit, the service auditor may have
determined that an automated control was functioning as intended. The service auditor should obtain evidence to
determine whether changes to the automated control have been made that affect its continued effective
functioning (for example, through inquiries of management and the inspection of logs to indicate whether controls
have been changed). Consideration of evidence about these changes may support either increasing or
decreasing the expected evidence to be obtained in the current period about the operating effectiveness of the
controls.
If the service auditor intends to use evidence of the operating effectiveness of controls that was obtained
in prior periods, and those controls have changed since they were last tested, the service auditor should perform
additional tests of the operating effectiveness of such controls in the current period. Changes may affect the
relevance of the evidence obtained in prior periods such that it may no longer be relevant. For example, changes3.67
3.68
3.69
3.70
in a system that enable the service organization to receive a new report from the system probably do not affect
the relevance of prior-period evidence; however, a change that causes data to be accumulated or calculated
differently does affect it.
If the service auditor identified deviations in the operation of a control in a prior year, the service auditor
may decide to increase the extent of testing in the current period. For example, if the opinion in the prior years’
service auditor’s report was qualified because of deviations in controls over the authorization of user access, the
service auditor may decide to increase the number of items tested in the current audit period. This would be the
case if the design or operation of the control had not been corrected in the current year, which may result in the
same kinds of deviations, or if a new control had been implemented (a new control may not have been
thoroughly tested and may have unexpected deficiencies in design or operating effectiveness, increasing the risk
that the controls would not have operated effectively).
Generally , IT processing is inherently consistent; therefore, the service auditor may be able to limit the
testing to one or a few instances of the control operation. An automated control should function consistently ,
unless the program, including the tables, files or other permanent data used by the program, is changed. Once
the service auditor determines that an automated control is functioning as intended, which could be determined
at the time the control is initially implemented or at some other date, the service auditor should perform tests to
determine that the control continues to function effectively. Such tests might include determining that changes to
the program are not made without being subject to the appropriate program-change controls, that the authorize
d
version of the program is used for processing transactions and that other relevant IT general controls are
effective.
A control may be designed to address an identified risk on its own or may function in combination with
another control. Often, the effectiveness of the control will depend on both manual and automated procedures.
For example, management’s follow-up of system-identified security-access-violation events is dependent on the
proper configuration and functioning of the security monitoring software.
Selecting Items to Be Tested
When determining the extent of tests of controls and whether sampling is appropriate, the service
auditor should consider the characteristics of the population of the controls to be tested, including the nature of
the controls, the frequency of their application and the expected deviation rate. CAS 530 addresses the
auditor’s use of statistical and non-statistical sampling when designing and selecting the audit sample, performing
tests of controls and tests of details and evaluating the results from the sample. If the service auditor determines
that sampling is appropriate, the service auditor should apply the requirements in paragraphs 6 to 8 of CAS 530
that address sampling in tests of controls (including “Application and Other Explanatory Material” provided in
Appendix 2 of CAS 530).
Controls Included in the Description That Are Not Tested3.71
3.72
3.73
3.74
3.75
1.
There may be situations in which the service auditor is unable to test controls related to certain
applicable trust services criteria because there were no instances of the control operating during the audit
period. In these situations, the service auditor’s tests should identify the applicable trust services criteria for
which tests of controls have not been performed and the reasons why they have not been performed.
Testing Changes to Controls
If the service organization makes changes to controls during the period that are relevant to meeting the
applicable trust services criteria stated in the description, and the service auditor believes the changes would be
considered significant by users, the service auditor should test the superseded controls before the change and
test the new controls after the change for the period they were in effect. For example, during the period June 1,
20X0, to May 31, 20X1, Example Service Organization decided to automate a control that was previously
performed manually . The service organization automated the control on December 5, 20X0. The service auditor
tests the manual control for the period June 1, 20X0, to December 14, 20X0, considering the nature and
frequency of the performance of the control, and then tests the automated control for the period December 15,
20X0, to May 31, 20X1, considering the guidance in paragraph 3.62 and the nature and frequency of the
performance of each control. If the service auditor cannot test the superseded controls, the service auditor
would disclose that fact in the description of tests and results and determine the effect on the service auditor’s
report.
Testing Compliance with Privacy Commitments
In a type 2 engagement that addresses the privacy principle, in addition to expressing an opinion on the
design and operating effectiveness of controls, the service auditor also expresses an opinion on whether the
service organization complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices (privacy commitments).
Information obtained from the service auditor’s assessment of the design and operating effectiveness of controls
related to privacy contributes to the service auditor’s evaluation of the risk of material noncompliance with the
service organization’s privacy commitments, which includes both intentional and unintentional material
noncompliance. The service auditor uses this information as part, but not all, of the reasonable basis for his or
her opinion regarding the service organization’s compliance with its privacy commitments.
Based on the assessment of the controls that address the trust services privacy criteria, the service
auditor determines the extent to which he or she needs to perform tests to detect material noncompliance with
the privacy commitments. Accordingly, the service auditor may alter the nature, timing and extent of tests
performed, based on the assessments and tests of the controls.
In an engagement in which the service auditor reports on an entity’s compliance with its privacy
commitments, the service auditor’s consideration of materiality is affected by
the nature of the requirements in the statement of privacy practices;2.
3.
3.76
3.77
3.78
3.79
the nature and frequency of identified noncompliance, with appropriate consideration of sampling
risk; and
qualitative considerations, including the needs and expectations of the report users.
The service auditor should apply procedures to provide reasonable assurance of detecting material
noncompliance. Determining these procedures and evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence obtained are
matters of professional judgment. When exercising such judgment, the service auditor should consider the
guidance in CAS 530 and paragraphs .48–.58 of Handbook Section 5025.
The following example illustrates how a service auditor might consider the foregoing in planning tests of
compliance with privacy commitments:
A service organization’s statement of privacy practices contains a commitment not to share personal information
obtained from users with other users. Based on the service auditor’s evaluation and tests, the service
organization’s controls over access to personal information are effective in meeting the relevant criteria and in
preventing one user’s employees from accessing personal information provided by any other user. To test
compliance with this commitment, the service auditor compares a daily log of all accesses to personal
information with a list, furnished by the user entity , of the names of user-entity employees authorized to access
such information. Because the access controls related to this commitment were effective, the service auditor
determined that it would only be necessary to perform this test on a limited number of daily logs throughout the
period. Had the controls not been as effective or had the service auditor identified deviations while testing
controls, the number of daily logs tested for compliance would have needed to be greater.
Using the Work of the Internal Audit Function
Paragraphs 2.16–.22 of this Guide discuss the service auditor’s responsibilities for the following:
Obtaining an understanding of the responsibilities and activities of the service organization’s internal audit
function
Determining whether work performed by the internal audit function is adequate for the service auditor’s
purposes
Determining the planned effect of that work on the service auditor’s procedures
In order for a service auditor to use specific work of the internal audit function, the service auditor
should evaluate and corroborate the specific internal audit work that they intend to use in order to confirm its
sufficiency and appropriateness for the practitioner’s purposes. They may also consider whether
the objectives, scope and criteria for the internal audit work are suitable for the practitioner’s purposes;
the work was performed by members of the internal audit function having adequate technical training and
proficiency;
the work of internal audit staff was properly supervised, reviewed and documented;
sufficient appropriate evidence was obtained to enable the internal audit function to draw reasonable
conclusions;3.80
3.81
3.82
conclusions reached are appropriate in the circumstances, and any reports prepared by the internal audit
function are consistent with the results of the work performed; and
exceptions relevant to the engagement or unusual matters disclosed by the internal audit function are properly
resolved.
The nature, timing, and extent of the service auditor’s corroboration of procedures performed on
specific work of the internal auditor function will depend on the service auditor’s assessment of the significance
of that work to the service auditor’s conclusions (for example, the significance of the risks that the controls are
intended to mitigate), the evaluation of the internal audit function and the evaluation of the specific work of the
internal audit function. Such procedures may include the following:
Audit of items already examined by the internal audit function
Audit of other similar items
Observation of procedures performed by the internal audit function
When the internal audit function provides direct assistance to the service auditor, as described in
paragraphs 2.16 and 4.10 of this Guide, the service auditor should
plan and supervise the work of the internal audit staff to gain assurance that the work was carried out with
due care. The practitioner would follow the guidance on planning and supervision of assistants set out in
Canadian Auditing Standards (CAS) 300 Planning an Audit of Financial Statements and in CP A
Canada Handbook – Assurance Section 5030, Quality Control Procedures for Assurance
Engagements Other Than Audits of Financial Statements and Other Historical Financial Information.
coordinate the details of such assistance with internal audit and inform the internal auditors of their
responsibilities, the objectives of the procedures they are to perform and matters that may affect the nature,
timing and extent of the audit procedures. supervise, review, evaluate and test the work performed by the
internal auditors to the extent appropriate in the circumstances. Because internal auditors are not independent
of the entity , they are presumed to provide the practitioner with less reliable evidence than work performed
directly by the practitioner. Accordingly , the level of supervision or review of the work of the internal audit
staff may be more extensive than if the practitioner’s own staff had performed the work.
Evaluating the Results of Tests
The service auditor should evaluate the results of tests of controls and, if the report addresses the
privacy principle, the results of tests of compliance with the service organization’s commitments in its statement
of privacy practices. In evaluating the results of tests, the service auditor investigates the nature and cause of any
identified deviations and determines whether
identified deviations are within the tolerable rate of deviation and are acceptable. If so, the testing that has
been performed provides an appropriate basis for concluding that the control operated effectively throughout
the specified period.
additional testing of the same control or other controls designed to meet the same criterion is necessary to3.83
3.84
3.85
3.86
3.87
reach a conclusion about whether the controls related to the criterion operated effectively throughout the
specified period.
the testing that has been performed provides an appropriate basis for concluding that the control did not
operate effectively throughout the specified period.
If the service auditor is unable to apply the planned testing procedures or appropriate alternative
procedures to selected items, the service auditor considers the reasons for this limitation and ordinarily considers
those selected items to be deviations from the prescribed policy or procedure for the purpose of evaluating the
sample.
The service auditor evaluates deficiencies related to the control environment or other components of the
service organization’s internal control and determines the effect on the service auditor’s opinion. For example,
the service auditor considers how deficiencies in the control environment would alter the nature, timing and
extent of his or her procedures. In certain circumstances, identified deficiencies may be so pervasive that they
may prevent controls from meeting one or more of the applicable trust services criteria, which may result in a
qualified or an adverse opinion.
If the service auditor becomes aware of deviations that have resulted from intentional acts by service
organization personnel, incidents of noncompliance with laws and regulations or other adverse events not
prevented or detected by a control that may affect one or more user entities, the service auditor should
determine whether this information should be communicated to affected user entities and whether this
communication has occurred. If the information has not been communicated, and management of the service
organization is unwilling to do so, the service auditor should take appropriate action, which may include the
following:
Obtaining legal advice about the consequences of different courses of action
Communicating with those charged with governance of the service organization
Denial of conclusion, modifying the service auditor’s opinion or adding an emphasis paragraph
Communicating with third parties (for example, a regulator) when required to do so
Withdrawing from the engagement
If, as a result of performing the audit procedures, the service auditor becomes aware that any identified
deviations have resulted from intentional acts by service organization personnel, the service auditor reassesses
the risk that management’s description of the service organization’s system is not fairly presented, the controls
are not suitably designed, the controls are not operating effectively and, if the report addresses the privacy
principle, the service organization has not complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
Additionally , depending on the nature of any intentional acts that are identified and the level of responsibility of
the service organization personnel involved in those acts (for example, senior management versus clerical
personnel), the service auditor considers the effect of the intentional act on the engagement and whether it is
appropriate for the service auditor to continue with, or withdraw from, the engagement.
If the service auditor becomes aware of incidents of noncompliance with laws and regulations or other3.88
3.89
3.90
1.
2.
3.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
3.91
adverse events that have not been prevented or detected by a control and that may affect one or more user
entities, the service auditor should determine the effect of such incidents on management’s description of the
service organization’s system; the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of the controls; if the
report addresses the privacy principle, the service organization’s compliance with the commitments in its
statement of privacy practices; and the service auditor’s report.
Paragraph 4.33 of this Guide presents an illustrative paragraph that would be added to the service
auditor’s report when controls are not operating effectively .
Obtaining Written Representation
As indicated in paragraph 2.01 of this Guide, one of the conditions for accepting or continuing an
engagement to report on controls at a service organization is that management of the service organization agrees
to the terms of the engagement by acknowledging and accepting its responsibility for providing the service
auditor with written representations at the conclusion of the engagement.
The service auditor should request management to provide written representations that
reaffirm its assertion that is attached to the description of the service organization’s system.
it has provided the service auditor with all relevant information and access agreed to.
it has disclosed to the service auditor any of the following of which it is aware:
Instances of noncompliance with laws and regulations or uncorrected errors attributable to the
service organization that may affect one or more user entities.
Knowledge of (1) any actual, suspected or alleged intentional acts by management or the
service organization’s employees that could adversely affect the fairness of the presentation of
management’s description of the service organization’s system or (2) whether the controls stated in
the description were suitably designed and operating effectively to meet the applicable trust services
criteria.
Design deficiencies in controls.
Instances when controls have not operated as described.
Any instances of noncompliance regarding its commitments set forth in its statement of privacy
practices.
Any events subsequent to the period covered by management’s description of the service
organization’s system up to the date of the service auditor’s report that could have a significant effect
on management’s assertion or the fact that no such subsequent events have occurred.
If a service organization uses a subservice organization, and management’s description of the service
organization’s system uses the inclusive method, the service auditor should also obtain written representations
from management of the subservice organization that address the matters identified in paragraph 3.90.3.92
3.93
3.94
3.95
3.96
3.97
3.98
The service auditor may consider it necessary to request written representations about matters in
addition to those listed in paragraph 3.90, including oral representations for which no other evidential matter
exists. The need for this request would be determined based on the facts and circumstances of the particular
engagement (for example, if changes to the service organization’s controls have occurred during the period
covered by the service auditor’s report, there might be a need to obtain representations that address the periods
before and after the change).
The written representations required by paragraph 3.90 are separate from, and in addition to,
management’s written assertion.
The written representations should be in the form of a representation letter addressed to the service
auditor, signed by the individuals identified by the service auditor and dated as of the same date as the service
auditor’s report.
If management does not provide one or more of the requested representations, the service auditor
should do the following:
Discuss the matter with management
Evaluate the effect of such refusal on the service auditor’s assessment of the integrity of management and
evaluate the effect that this may have on the reliability of management’s representations and evidence in
general
Take appropriate actions, which may include a denial of conclusio. or withdrawing from the engagement
If management refuses to provide the service auditor with (a) representations that reaffirm its assertion
or (b) a representation that it has provided the service auditor with all relevant information and access agreed to,
the service auditor should deny a conclusion or withdraw from the engagement. This is the case because these
representations are fundamental to the engagement and affect all the other representations made by management
and other service organization personnel during the course of the engagement.
If the service auditor is unable to obtain written representations regarding relevant trust services criteria
and related controls at the subservice organization, management of the service organization would be unable to
use the inclusive method but may be able to use the carve-out method.
Because management’s written representations are an important consideration when forming the service
auditor’s opinion, the service auditor ordinarily would not be able to issue a report until they have received the
representation letter. Illustrative representation letters for a service auditor’s engagement are presented in
Appendix C, “Illustrative Management Assertions and Related Service Auditor’s Reports on Controls at a
Service Organization Relevant to Security , Availability , Processing Integrity , Confidentiality or Privacy ,” of this
Guide.
Subsequent Events3.99
3.100
3.101
3.102
The service auditor makes inquiries about whether management is aware of any events subsequent to
the period covered by management’s description of the service organization’s system up to the date of the
service auditor’s report that could have a significant effect on management’s assertion and the underlying subject
matter of the assertion. If the service auditor becomes aware, through inquiry or otherwise, of such an event or
any other event that is of such a nature and significance that its disclosure is necessary to prevent users of the
report from being misled, and information about that event is not disclosed by management in its description, the
service auditor should modify his or her opinion on the fairness of the presentation of the description and
disclose the event in the service auditor’s report. The service auditor is responsible for determining the effect of
the event on the service auditor’s report, regardless of whether management appropriately discloses the event
and modifies its written assertion.
The following are examples of subsequent events that could affect management’s assertion or
description of the service organization’s system:
After the period covered by the service auditor’s report, management discovered that during the last quarter
of the period covered by the service auditor’s report, the IT security director provided all the programmers
with access to the production data files, thus enabling them to modify data.
After the period covered by the service auditor’s report, management discovered that a confidentiality breach
occurred at the service organization during the period covered by the service auditor’s report.
After the period covered by the service auditor’s report, it was discovered that during the audit period, the
signatures on a number of nonautomated transaction execution instructions that appeared to be authenticated
by signature verification were not authenticated.
There may be situations in which the event discovered subsequent to the period covered by
management’s description of the service organization’s system up to the date of the service auditor’s report
would likely have no effect on management’s assertion because the underlying situation did not occur or exist
until after the period covered by management’s description of the service organization’s system; however, the
matter may be sufficiently important for disclosure by management in its description and, potentially , the service
auditor in a paragraph of the service auditor’s report. The following are examples of such subsequent events:
The service organization was acquired by another entity .
The service organization experienced a significant operating disruption.
A data center hosting service organization that provides applications and technology that enable user entities
to perform essential business functions made significant changes to its information systems, including a system
conversion or significant outsourcing of operations.
The service organization may wish to disclose such events in a separate section of the description of the service
organization’s system titled, for example, “Other Information Provided by the Service Organization.”
The service auditor has no responsibility to keep informed of events subsequent to the date of the
service auditor’s report; however, after the release of the service auditor’s report, the service auditor may
become aware of conditions that existed at the report date that might have affected management’s assertion and
the service auditor’s report had the service auditor been aware of them. The evaluation of such subsequent3.103
3.104
3.105
1
information is similar to the evaluation of information discovered subsequent to the date of the report on an audit
of financial statements, as described in CAS 560, “Subsequent Events). The service auditor should adapt and
apply the guidance in CAS 560.
Documentation
Paragraphs A54 through A63 of Canadian Standards on Quality Control 1 (CSQC1) “Quality Control
for Firms That Perform Audits and Reviews of Financial Statements, and Other Assurance Engagements”
describe the service auditor’s responsibilities related to documentation. In addition, the service auditor considers
whether users in certain industry segments (for example, government) may require additional documentation.
Paragraph 58 of Handbook Section 5025 states that the practitioner should document matters that his or her
professional judgment are important in providing evidence to support the conclusion expressed in his or her
report.
Consideration of Management’s Assertion
Management may have provided the service auditor with an assertion at the beginning of the
engagement that includes all the relevant aspects1 that would be expected. The service auditor may identify
deficiencies in the operating effectiveness of controls that cause the service auditor to qualify the opinion. In this
instance, the service auditor would evaluate the reason why management had not identified the deficiencies in the
operating effectiveness of the controls and determine whether management should have known these existed
and whether management is in a position to be able to provide the assertion or whether additional work needs
to be done by management before they provide the final assertion that is attached to the description. In instances
in which the service auditor has identified deficiencies that give rise to a qualification in the opinion, management
is expected to modify their assertion to note those deficiencies.
The service auditor may determine that management’s assertion does not provide sufficient detail, fails
to disclose deficiencies identified by the service auditor that resulted in a qualification of conclusion or contains
inaccuracies. In these situations, the service auditor should request that management modify its assertion. For
example, when deviations identified in the audit cause the service auditor to qualify the opinion, the service
auditor should ask management to amend its assertion to reflect the identified deficiencies. If management
refuses to do so, the service auditor takes appropriate action, which may include additional modifications to the
service auditor’s report, rendering an adverse opinion or withdrawing from the engagement.
Please refer to paragraph 3.12 of this Guide for further information on the relevant aspects4.01
4.02
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Chapter 4
Reporting
This chapter describes the service auditor’s responsibilities when reporting on a service organization’s controls
relevant to security , availability , processing integrity , confidentiality or privacy . This chapter primarily focuses on
the elements of a service auditor’s report and modifications to the service auditor’s opinion.
Responsibilities of the Service Auditor
The service auditor’s responsibilities for reporting on a service organization controls (SOC) 2
engagement includes the following:
Preparing the service auditor’s report, including all the report elements identified in paragraph 4.02, and
modifying the report if the service auditor determines it is appropriate to do so
For a type 2 report, preparing a written description of the tests of controls performed by the service auditor
and the results of those tests
For a type 2 report that addresses the privacy principle, preparing a written description of the service
auditor’s tests of the service organization’s compliance with the commitments in its statement of privacy
practices and the results of those tests
Contents of the Service Auditor’s Report
Paragraph 62 of Handbook Section 5025, provides the minimum reporting standards that the
practitioners report should:
identify to whom the report is directed;
describe the objective of the engagement and the entity or portion thereof, the subject matter and the
time period covered by the engagement;
in an attest report, identify management’s assertion;
describe the responsibilities of management and the practitioner;
identify the applicable standards in accordance with which the engagement was conducted;
identify the criteria against which the subject matter was evaluated;
state a conclusion that conveys the level of assurance being provided and/or any reservation the
practitioner may have;
state the date of the report;9.
10.
1.
2.
3.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
i.
ii.
4.
5.
identify the name of the practitioner (or firm); and
identify the place of issue.
A service auditor’s type 2 report on controls relevant to security , availability , processing integrity , confidentiality
or privacy should include the following elements:
A title that includes the word independent.
An addressee.
Identification of the following:
Management’s description of the service organization’s system and the function performed by
the system or service provided by the service organization.
Any parts of management’s description of the service organization’s system that are not covered
by the service auditor’s report.
The criteria for evaluating whether management’s description of the service organization’s
system is fairly presented.
The applicable trust services criteria for evaluating whether controls are suitably designed and
operating effectively .
When the report addresses the privacy principle, the service organization’s statement of privacy
practices.
Any services performed by a subservice organization and whether the carve-out method or
inclusive method was used in relation to them. Depending on which method is used, the following
should be included:
If the carve-out method was used, a statement that management’s description of the
service organization’s system excludes controls of the subservice organization, and when the
report addresses the privacy principle, that the description also excludes the subservice
organization’s statement of privacy practices and that the service auditor’s procedures do not
extend to the subservice organization.
If the inclusive method was used, a statement that management’s description of the service
organization’s system includes applicable trust services criteria and controls for the subservice
organization, and when the report addresses the privacy principle, that the description also
includes the subservice organization’s statement of privacy practices and that the service
auditor’s procedures included procedures related to the subservice organization.
If management’s description of the service organization’s system refers to the need for
complementary user-entity controls, a statement that the service auditor has not evaluated the suitability of
the design or operating effectiveness of complementary user-entity controls and that the applicable trust
services criteria stated in the description can be met only if complementary user- entity controls are suitably
designed and operating effectively along with the related controls at the service organization.
A reference to management’s assertion and a statement that management is responsible for thea.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
6.
7.
8.
a.
b.
c.
9.
following:
Preparing the description of the service organization’s system; the assertion; and, when the
report covers controls over privacy , the statement of privacy practices, including the completeness,
accuracy and method of presentation of the description, assertion and statement of privacy practices.
Providing the services covered by the description of the service organization’s system.
Selecting the trust services principle(s) being reported on and stating the applicable trust
services criteria and related controls in the description of the service organization’s system.
Identifying any applicable trust services criteria relevant to the principle being reported on that
have been omitted from the description and explaining the reason for the omission.
Designing, implementing and documenting controls that are suitably designed and operating
effectively to meet the applicable trust services criteria.
When the report covers controls over privacy , complying with the commitments in its statement
of privacy practices included in, or attached to, the description of the service organization’s system.
A statement that the service auditor’s responsibility is to express an opinion on the fairness of the
presentation of management’s description of the service organization’s system; the suitability of the design
and operating effectiveness of the controls to meet the applicable trust services criteria; and, when the
report addresses the privacy principle, the service organization’s compliance with the commitments in its
statement of privacy practices, based on the service auditor’s audit.
A statement that the audit was conducted in accordance with CPA Canada Handbook Section
5025, Standards for Assurance Engagements Other than Audits of Financial Statements and Other
Historical Financial Information, and that those standards require the service auditor to plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether management’s description of the service
organization’s system is fairly presented; whether the controls are suitably designed and operating
effectively throughout the specified period to meet the applicable trust services criteria and, if the report
addresses the privacy principle, whether the service organization complied with the commitments in its
statement of privacy practices.
A statement that an audit of management’s description of a service organization’s system and the
suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls involves performing procedures to obtain
evidence about the following:
The fairness of the presentation of the description.
The suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of the controls to meet the applicable
trust services criteria.
If the report addresses the privacy principle, the service organization’s compliance with the
commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
A statement that the audit included assessing the risks that management’s description of the service
organization’s system is not fairly presented; that the controls were not suitably designed or operating
effectively to meet the applicable trust services criteria; and, if the report addresses the privacy principle,10.
11.
12.
13.
a.
b.
c.
d.
14.
15.
a.
b.
that the service organization did not comply with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
A statement that the audit also included testing the operating effectiveness of those controls that the
service auditor considers necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services
criteria were met and, if the report addresses the privacy principle, testing the service organization’s
compliance with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
A statement that the service auditor believes the audit provides a reasonable basis for his or her
opinion.
A statement about the inherent limitations of controls, including the risk of projecting to future periods
any evaluation of the fairness of the presentation of management’s description of the service organization’s
system or conclusions about the suitability of the design or operating effectiveness of controls and, when
the report addresses the privacy principle, the service organization’s compliance with the commitments in
its statement of privacy practices.
The service auditor’s opinion on whether, in all material respects, based on the criteria described in
management’s assertion
management’s description of the service organization’s system fairly presents the service
organization’s system that was designed and implemented throughout the specified period.
the controls related to the applicable trust services criteria were suitably designed to provide
reasonable assurance that those criteria would be met if the controls operated effectively throughout
the specified period.
the controls that the service auditor tested, which were those necessary to provide reasonable
assurance that the applicable trust services criteria were met, operated effectively throughout the
specified period.
if the report addresses the privacy principle, the service organization complied with the
commitments in its statement of privacy practices throughout the specified period.
If the application of complementary user-entity controls is necessary to meet the applicable trust
services criteria, a reference to this condition.
A reference to a part of the service auditor’s report that contains a description of the service
auditor’s tests of controls and the results thereof and that includes the following:
Identification of each of the applicable trust services criteria, the controls that were tested
(whether the items tested for each control represent all or a selection of the items in the population)
and the nature of the tests in sufficient detail to enable users of the report to determine the effect of
such tests on their risk assessments.
If deviations have been identified in the operation of controls included in the description, the
extent of testing performed by the service auditor that led to the identification of the deviations,
including the number of items tested, and the number and nature of the deviations noted, even if, on
the basis of tests performed, the service auditor concludes that the related criteria were met.16.
a.
b.
17.
18.
19.
4.03
4.04
4.05
4.06
If the report addresses the privacy principle, a reference to a part of the service auditor’s report that
contains a description of the service auditor’s tests of compliance with the service organization’s
commitments in its statement of privacy practices and the results thereof and that includes the following:
Identification of the commitments that were tested, whether the items tested for each
commitment represent all or a selection of the items in the population, and the nature of the tests in
sufficient detail to enable users of the report to determine the effect of such tests on their risk
assessments.
If deviations have been identified in the service organization’s compliance with the commitments
in its statement of privacy practices, the extent of testing performed by the service auditor that led to
the identification of the deviations, including the number of items tested and the number and nature of
the deviations noted, even if, on the basis of tests performed, the service auditor concludes that the
related commitment was complied with.
A statement indicating that the service auditor’s report is intended solely for the information and use
of management of the service organization and other specified parties.
The date of the service auditor’s report.
The name of the service auditor and the place of issue.
Describing Tests and the Results of Tests in a Type 2 Report1
A service auditor’s type 2 report should contain a reference to a description of the service auditor’s
tests of controls and the results of those tests. If the type 2 report addresses the privacy principle, it should also
contain a reference to a description of the service auditor’s tests of the service organization’s compliance with
the commitments in its statement of privacy practices. The description should identify the controls and any
privacy commitments that were tested, whether the items tested represent all or a selection of the items in the
population, and the nature of the tests performed in sufficient detail to enable users to determine the effect of
such tests on the user’s particular objectives.
The concept of materiality is not applicable when reporting the results of tests for which deviations have
been identified because the service auditor does not have the ability to determine whether a deviation will be
relevant to a particular user. Consequently , the service auditor reports all deviations. If the service auditor has
not identified any deviations, the service auditor may document those results with a phrase such as “No
deviations noted.”
The description of tests need not be a duplication of the service auditor’s detailed work program, which
might make the report too voluminous for users and provide more than the required level of detail. The service
auditor is not required to indicate the size of the sample unless deviations were identified during testing.
If deviations have been identified, the service auditor’s description of tests and results should identify the
extent of testing performed by the service auditor that led to the identification of the deviations, including the
number of items tested and the number and nature of the deviations noted, even if, on the basis of tests4.07
4.08
performed, the service auditor concludes that the applicable trust services criteria were met, and the service
organization complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
If deviations are identified, it may be helpful to users of the report for management to disclose, to the
extent known, the causative factors for the deviation, the controls that mitigate the effect of the deviation,
corrective actions taken and other qualitative factors that would assist users in understanding the effect of the
deviations. Such information may be included in an attachment to the description titled “Other Information
Provided by Example Service Organization That Is Not Covered by the Service Auditor’s Report” or in the
description and referred to in the service auditor’s tests and results. If such information is included in the
description, the service auditor would need to corroborate such information through inquiry , inspection of
documentation and other procedures. Information provided by management about controls that mitigate the
effect of deviations or corrective actions should not include forward- looking information, such as future plans to
implement controls.
The following example illustrates the documentation of tests of controls for which deviations have been
identified. It is assumed that in each situation, other relevant controls and tests of controls would also be
described:
Criteria. Procedures exist to restrict physical access to the defined system, including, but not limited to,
facilities, backup media and other system components, such as firewalls, routers and servers.
Example Service Organization’ s controls. Security personnel deactivate physical security access cards of
terminated employees on a daily basis using a list generated by the human resources system.
Service auditor’ s tests of controls. A sample of terminated employees is selected from a list generated by
the human resources system and the termination date is compared with the access card deactivation date for
each employee.
Results of tests of controls. For one terminated employee in an initial sample of 25, the employee’s physical
access security card was not deactivated until 90 days after the employee’s last day of work. In an additional
sample of 15 terminated employees, no additional deviations were noted.
Management’ s response. The terminated employee’s name was not listed on the report from the human
resources system until 90 days after termination. Subsequent investigation determined that the report used for
removing physical access was generated based on the last payroll date of the employee, rather than the last
date employed. This employee was one of 15 employees who were a part of a reduction in force and
received the severance benefit. These employees each continued on the payroll system for 90 days after
termination. The physical access cards of all employees receiving severance have been deactivated and, in
addition, the report from the human resources system has been changed to generate the list based on the last
date of employment.4.09
4.10
4.11
4.12
Describing Tests and Results When Using the Internal Audit Function
If the work of the internal audit function has been used, the service auditor should not make reference to
that work in the service auditor’s opinion. Notwithstanding its degree of autonomy and objectivity , the internal
audit function is not independent of the service organization. The service auditor has sole responsibility for the
opinion expressed in the service auditor’s report; accordingly , that responsibility is not reduced by the service
auditor’s use of the work of the internal audit function.
If the work of the internal audit function has been used in performing tests of controls, the part of the
service auditor’s report that describes the service auditor’s tests of controls and the results thereof should
include a description of the internal auditor’s work and the service auditor’s procedures with respect to that
work. The phrase “using the work of the internal audit function” is derived from Handbook Section 5050 and
refers to work designed and performed by the internal audit function on its own. This would include tests of
controls designed and performed by the internal audit function during the period covered by the type 2 report. I
f
the service auditor uses members of the service organization’s internal audit function to provide direct
assistance, including assistance in performing tests of controls that are designed by the service auditor and
performed under the direction, supervision, and review of the service auditor, the description of tests of controls
and results need not distinguish between the tests performed by members of the internal audit function and the
tests performed by the service auditor because, when the internal audit function provides direct assistance, the
work performed by the internal audit function undergoes the same scrutiny as if it were performed by the service
auditor’s staff. When the service auditor uses members of the service organization’s internal audit function to
provide direct assistance, the service auditor should adapt and apply the requirements of paragraph 35 of
CSAE 3416.
The service auditor’s description of tests of controls performed by the internal audit function and the
service auditor’s procedures with respect to that work may be presented in a number of ways (for example, by
including introductory material in the description of tests of controls indicating that certain work of the internal
audit function was used in performing tests of controls or by specifically identifying the tests performed by the
internal audit function and attributing those tests to the internal audit function).
The following are examples of introductory material that may be included in the description of tests of
controls and results to inform readers that the service auditor has used the work of the internal audit function to
perform tests of controls:
Throughout the audit period, members of XYZ Service Organization’s internal audit function performed tests
of controls related to the following criterion: procedures exist to restrict logical access to the defined system,
including distribution of output restricted to authorized users. Members of the internal audit function observed
the controls being performed by employees, inspected documentation of the performance of the control, and
reperformed a sample of control activities. The tests performed by the members of the internal audit function
and the results of those tests are presented under the captions “Tests Performed” and “Results of Tests.” We
reperformed selected tests that had been performed by members of the internal audit function and found no4.13
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
4.14
exceptions.
Members of XYZ Service Organization’s internal audit function performed tests of controls for the following
criterion: procedures exist to restrict logical access to the defined system, including distribution of output
restricted to authorized users. The tests performed by members of the internal audit function included inquiry
of employees who performed the control activities, observation of the control being performed at different
times during the audit period, reperformance and audit of the documentation for a sample of requests for
system access and a sample of requests for reports. The tests performed by the members of the internal audit
function and the results of those tests are presented under the captions “Tests Performed” and “Results of
Tests.” We tested the work of members of the internal audit function through a combination of independent
testing and reperformance and noted no exceptions.
Modifications of the Service Auditor’s Report
The service auditor’s opinion should be modified, and the service auditor’s report should contain a clear
description of all the reasons for the modification if the service auditor concludes that
management’s description of the service organization’s system is not fairly presented, in all material
respects;
the controls are not suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust
services criteria would be met if the controls operated as described;
in the case of a type 2 report, the controls did not operate effectively throughout the specified period
to meet the applicable trust services criteria stated in management’s description of the service
organization’s system;
a scope limitation exists, resulting in the service auditor’s inability to obtain sufficient appropriate
evidence; or
in the case of a type 2 report that addresses the privacy principle, the service organization did not
comply with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
When determining whether to modify the service auditor’s report, the service auditor considers the
individual and aggregate effect of identified deviations in management’s description of the service organization’s
system and the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of the controls throughout the specified
period. The service auditor considers quantitative and qualitative factors, such as the following:
The nature and cause of the deviations
The tolerable rate of deviations that the service auditor has established
The pervasiveness of the deviations (for example, whether more than one criterion would be affected)
The likelihood that the deviations are indicators of control deficiencies that will result in failure to meet the
applicable trust services criteria
The magnitude of such failures that could occur as a result of control deficiencies
Whether users could be misled if the service auditor’s opinion or individual components of the opinion were
not modified4.15
4.16
4.17
4.18
1.
2.
3.
4.19
If the service auditor decides that his or her opinion should be modified, the report should contain a
clear description of all the reasons for the modification. The objective of that description is to enable report
users to develop their own assessments of the effect of deficiencies and deviations on users.
If a modified opinion is appropriate, the service auditor determines whether to issue a qualification of
conclusion, an adverse opinion, or a denial of conclusion.
When the service auditor has determined that a qualification of conclusion is appropriate, in addition to
adding a paragraph to the service auditor’s report before the opinion paragraph, the service auditor should also
modify the opinion paragraph of the service auditor’s report as follows (new language is shown in boldface
italics; deleted language is shown in strikethrough):
In our opinion, in all material respects
 except for the matter referred to in the preceding paragraph,
based on the description criteria identified in [name of service organization]’s assertion and the applicable
trust services criteria, in all material respects …
When the service auditor has determined that an adverse opinion is appropriate, in addition to adding a
paragraph to the report that precedes the opinion paragraph and explains all the substantive reasons for the
adverse opinion and the principal effects on the subject matter of the report, the service auditor should also
modify the opinion paragraph of the service auditor’s report. The following is an example of such a paragraph
when the service auditor is expressing an adverse opinion on all three components of the opinion (new language
is shown in boldface italics; deleted language is shown in strikethrough):
In our opinion, in all material respects
 because of the matter referred to in the preceding paragraph,
based on the description criteria identified in [name of service organization]’s assertion and the applicable
trust services criteria
the description does not fairly presents the [type or name of system] that was designed and
implemented throughout the period [date] to [date].
the controls stated in the description were not suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance that
the applicable trust services criteria would be met if the controls operated effectively throughout the period
[date] to [date].
the controls tested, which were those necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the criteria
stated in the description were met, did not operated effectively throughout the period [date] to [date].
In some circumstances, the service auditor may decide to deny a conclusion because he or she is unable
to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence but, based on the limited procedures performed, has concluded that
certain aspects of management’s description of the service organization’s system are not fairly presented, certain
controls are not suitably designed or certain controls did not operate effectively . In these circumstances, the
service auditor should identify these findings in his or her report. The service auditor may also deny a conclusion
if management of the service organization fails to provide both a written assertion or an appropriate letter of
representations.4.20
4.21
4.22
4.23
If the service auditor denies a conclusion, the service auditor’s report should not identify the procedures
that were performed nor include statements describing the characteristics of a service auditor’s engagement
because to do so might overshadow the disclaimer. When denying a conclusion, in addition to adding a
paragraph to the service auditor’s report that describes the reason for the disclaimer and any deficiencies
identified by the service auditor, the opinion paragraph would be replaced by the following denial of conclusion:
(new language is shown in boldface italics):
Because of the matter described in the preceding paragraph, the scope of our work was not
sufficient to enable us to express, and we do not express, an opinion.
Illustrative Paragraphs When the Description Is Not Fairly Presented
A number of situations are presented in Chapter 3, “Performing the Engagement,” of this Guide in
which the service auditor determines that the description is not fairly presented. In practice, if the service auditor
makes such a determination, the service auditor would discuss the matter with management of the service
organization, describe the changes that need to be made for the description to be fairly presented and ask
management to amend the description to include the omitted information or correct the misstated information.
The following paragraphs contain examples of paragraphs that would be inserted before the modified opinion
paragraph of the service auditor’s report if management is unwilling to amend a description that is not fairly
presented. For all these paragraphs, the service auditor would modify the opinion paragraph as follows (new
language is shown in boldface italics; deleted language is shown in strikethrough):
In our opinion, in all material respects
 except for the matter referred to in the preceding paragraph,
based on the description criteria identified in [name of service organization]’s assertion and the applicable
trust services criteria, in all material respects …
The following is an example of a paragraph that would be added to the service auditor’s report when
the description includes controls that have not been implemented:
The accompanying description states that Example Service Organization’s system is protected against
unauthorized logical access through the use of operator identification numbers and passwords. Based on
inquiries of staff personnel and observation of activities, we determined that operator identification numbers
and passwords are used in applications A and B but are not used in application C.
The following is an example of a paragraph that would be added to the service auditor’s report when
the functions and processing performed by a subservice organization are significant to the users, and the service
organization has not disclosed that it uses a subservice organization and the functions that the subservice
organization performs:
Example Trust Organization’s description does not indicate that it uses a subservice organization for
information processing, which we believe could be significant to users because controls at the subservice4.24
4.25
4.26
4.27
organization over changes to programs, as well as physical and logical access to system resources, would
be relevant to users.
If management of the service organization inappropriately omits one or more applicable trust services
criteria from the description of the service organization’s system, the service auditor should request that
management include the omitted criteria and related controls. If management refuses to do so, the service
auditor should deny a conclusion or withdraw from the engagement.
Identifying Information That Is Not Covered by the Service Auditor’s
Report
The service organization may wish to attach to the description of the service organization’s system, or
include in a document containing the service auditor’s report, information in addition to its description. The
following are examples of such information:
Future plans for new systems
Other services provided by the service organization that are not included in the scope of the engagement
Qualitative information, such as marketing claims, that may not be objectively measurable
Responses from management to deviations identified by the service auditor when such responses have not
been subject to procedures by the service auditor
Paragraph 3.16 of this Guide states that such other information should be distinguished from the service
organization’s description of its system by excluding the information from the description. It also states that, if
the other information is attached to the description or included in a document that contains the description of the
service organization’s system and the service auditor’s report, the other information should be differentiated
from the information covered by the service auditor’s report, for example, through the use of a title such as
“Other Information Provided by Example Service Organization That Is Not Covered by the Service Auditor’s
Report.”
Because of the nature of the other information or its presentation, the service auditor may wish to add a
paragraph to the service auditor’s report indicating that the other information is not covered by the service
auditor’s report. The following is an example of such a paragraph:
The information attached to the description titled “Other Information Provided by Example Service
Organization That Is Not Covered by the Service Auditor’s Report” describes the service organization’s
medical billing system. It is presented by the management of Example Service Organization to provide
additional information and is not a part of the service organization’s description of its medical records
management system made available to user entities during the period from June 1, 20X0, to May 31,
20X1. Information about Example Service Organization’s medical billing system has not been subjected to
the procedures applied in the audit of the description of the medical records management system and the
suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls to meet the related criteria stated in the4.28
4.29
4.30
4.31
description of the medical records management system.
The service auditor also has the option of denying a conclusion on information that is not covered by the
service auditor’s report by adding the words “and accordingly , we express no opinion on it” at the end of the
paragraph illustrated in paragraph 4.27.
Illustrative Paragraphs: Controls Are Not Suitably Designed
The following is an example of a paragraph that would be added to the service auditor’s report
(preceding the opinion paragraph) if the service auditor concludes that controls are not suitably designed to mee
t
an applicable trust services criterion:
The accompanying description of ABC Service Organization’s system states on page [aa] that ABC
Service Organization’s system supervisor makes changes to the systems only if the changes are authorized,
tested and documented. The procedures, however, do not include a requirement for approval of the
change before the change is placed into operation. As a result, the controls are not suitably designed to
meet the following criterion: controls provide reasonable assurance that only authorized, tested and
documented changes are made to the system.
The service auditor may conclude that the controls are not suitably designed to meet part of a criterion.
The following is an example of a paragraph that would be added to the service auditor’s report (preceding the
opinion paragraph), if the service auditor determines that controls are not suitably designed to meet part of a
criterion:
The criteria for the privacy principle includes the following criterion: personal information is provided to the
individual in an understandable form, in a reasonable time frame and at a reasonable cost, if any . Attempts
to access the system using an authenticated identity indicated that the design of the control requires users
with authenticated identities to wait 24 hours before being granted access to their personal information. As
a result, the authentication control is not suitably designed to meet the aforementioned criteria.
The service auditor focuses on the suitability of the design of controls to meet the related applicable trust
services criteria during the period covered by the service auditor’s report, not the suitability of the design of
controls to meet criteria in future periods when conditions may change. For example, if computer programs are
correctly processing data during the period covered by the service auditor’s report, and the design of the
controls will need to be changed in future periods to accommodate conditions that will exist in the future, the
service auditor would not be required to report this information as a design deficiency in his or her report.
2
However, if a service auditor becomes aware of the need for change to the design of controls at the service
organization to address future conditions, the service auditor, in his or her judgment, may choose to
communicate this information to the service organization’s management and may consider advising management
to disclose this information and its plans for changing the design of its controls to address the expected future
conditions in a section of the service auditor’s document titled “Other Information Provided by the Service4.32
4.33
Organization That Is Not Covered by The Service Auditor’s Report.”
Controls W ere Not Suitably Designed During a Portion of the Period
The following is an example of a paragraph that would be added to the service auditor’s report
(preceding the opinion paragraph), if the service auditor concludes that controls are not suitably designed to
meet an applicable trust services criterion for a portion of the period under audit, until an additional control was
added:
The accompanying description of ABC Service Organization’s system states on page [aa] that ABC
Service Organization’s system supervisor makes changes to the systems only if the changes are authorized,
tested and documented. The procedures, however, did not include a requirement for approval of the
change before the change is placed into operation during the period [date] to [date]. On [date], ABC
Service Organization implemented a procedure requiring all changes to be reviewed and approved by the
director of application development prior to the change to the system. As a result, the controls were not
suitably designed to meet the following criterion during the period [date] to [date]: controls provide
reasonable assurance that only authorized, tested and documented changes are made to the system.
Illustrative Paragraph: Controls Are Not Operating Effectively
The service auditor may conclude that controls are suitably designed but are not operating effectively to
meet one or more of the applicable trust services criteria. The following is an example of a paragraph that may
be added to the service auditor’s report (preceding the opinion paragraph), if the service auditor determines that
controls are not operating effectively:
ABC Service Organization states in the description of its system that the director of IT may approve
emergency changes to the system without receiving a written request for such changes, as long as the
changes are documented within 48 hours after implementation into production. However, as noted on page
[aa] of the description of tests of controls and the results thereof, controls related to the authorization of
emergency changes were not performed and, therefore, were not operating effectively throughout the
period [date] to [date]. This control deficiency resulted in not meeting the following criterion: procedures
exist to provide that emergency changes are documented and authorized in a timely manner.
In addition, the service auditor modifies the opinion paragraph of the service auditor’s report on operating
effectiveness as follows (new language is shown in boldface italics; deleted language is shown in strikethrough):
In our opinion, in all material respects
, except for the matter described in the preceding paragraph,
based on the description criteria identified in [name of service organization]’s assertion and the
applicable trust services criteria, in all material respects …4.34
4.35
4.36
Scope Limitation: Service Auditor Is Unable to Obtain Sufficient
Appropriate Evidence
The following is an example of a paragraph that would be added to the service auditor’s report if the
service auditor is unable to obtain sufficient appropriate evidence regarding the operating effectiveness of
controls to meet a criterion:
The accompanying description of ABC Service Organization’s system states on page [aa] that ABC
Service Organization makes system changes only if they are authorized, tested and documented.
Documentation of the authorization and testing of proposed system changes was destroyed on July 15,
20X0, and we were unable to obtain sufficient evidence that system changes were authorized and tested
prior to July 15, 20X0. As a result, we were unable to determine whether controls were operating
effectively during the period January 1, 20X0, to July 14, 20X0, to meet the following criterion:
procedures exist to provide that only authorized, tested and documented changes are made to the system.
Reporting on Compliance with the Commitments in the Statement of
Privacy Practices When the Type 2 Report Addresses the Privacy
Principle
A service auditor’s type 2 report that covers controls over privacy includes the service auditor’s opinion
on whether the service organization complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices
throughout the period covered by the service auditor’s report. The following are situations that may result in a
modification of the service auditor’s report:
The statement of privacy practices is not included with management’s description of the service
organization’s system or is incomplete.
Privacy commitments are not clearly described in management’s privacy statement.
The results of tests performed do not provide sufficient appropriate evidence to conclude that the service
organization complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices throughout the audit period.
The following are examples of paragraphs that may be added to the service auditor’s report (preceding
the opinion paragraph), if the service auditor determines that the service organization did not comply with the
commitments in its statement of privacy practices (new language is shown in boldface italics; deleted language is
shown in strikethrough):
The accompanying statement of privacy practices states on page [aa] that Example Service Organization
requires all vendors with whom it shares personal information to sign a data-sharing agreement requiring these
vendors to adhere to privacy practices similar to those established by Example Service Organization. The
results of our tests indicated that two vendors with whom personal information was shared had not signed a
data-sharing agreement. As a result, the following commitment was not met: all vendors with whom the
service organization shares personal information are required to sign a data-sharing agreement that requires4.37
these vendors to follow privacy practices similar to ours.
In our opinion, in all material respects, except for the matter described in the preceding paragraph,
based on the description criteria identified in [name of service organization]’s assertion and the applicable
trust services criteria, in all material respects …
Example Service Organization states in its statement of privacy practices on page [aa] that Example Service
Organization securely disposes of all copies, including archived and backup copies, of personal information
records. However, as noted on page [bb] of the description of tests of controls and the results thereof,
backup copies of records were not disposed of securely . This results in a failure to meet the following
commitment of the service organization: archived and backup copies of personal information are disposed of
securely.
In our opinion, in all material respects, except for the matter described in the preceding paragraph,
based on the description criteria identified in [name of service organization]’s assertion and the applicable
trust services criteria, in all material respects …
Reporting When the Service Organization Uses the Carve-Out
Method to Present a Subservice Organization
The following are modifications to the scope paragraph of a type 2 report for use in engagements in
which the service organization uses a subservice organization and presents its description using the carve-out
method (new language is shown in boldface italics):
Scope
We have audited the attached description titled “XYZ Service Organization’s Description of the Adaptable
Cloud Computing System for the Period January 1, 200X, to December 31, 200X”
3 (the description) and the
suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls to meet the criteria for the privacy principle set
forth in Trust Services Principles and Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,
Confidentiality and Privacy. (applicable trust services criteria), throughout the period January 1, 20X1, to
December 31, 20X1.
XYZ Service Organization uses a service organization (subservice organization) to perform certain
processing of customers’ personal information. The description indicates that certain applicable
trust services criteria can only be met if controls at the subservice organization are suitably designed
and operating effectively. The description presents XYZ Service Organization’s system; its controls
relevant to the applicable trust services criteria; and the types of controls that the service
organization expects to be implemented, suitably designed and operating effectively at the subservice
organization to meet certain applicable trust services criteria. The description does not include any
of the controls implemented at the subservice organization. Our audit did not extend to the services4.38
1.
2.
3.
4.
4.39
provided by the subservice organization or the subservice organization’s compliance with the
commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
Following are modifications to the applicable subparagraphs of the opinion paragraph of a type 2 report
for use in engagements in which the service organization uses a subservice organization and presents its
description using the carve-out method (new language is shown in boldface italics):
In our opinion, in all material respects, based on the description criteria identified in XYZ Service Organization’s
assertion and the applicable trust services criteria
the description fairly presents XYZ Service Organization’s [type or name of] system and the related
privacy practices that were designed and implemented throughout the period [date] to [date].
the controls stated in the description were suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance that the
applicable trust services criteria would be met if the controls operated effectively throughout the period
[date] to [date], and the subservice organization applied, throughout the period [date] to [date],
the t
ypes of controls expected to be implemented at the subservice or ganization and incorporate d
in the design of the system.
the controls we tested, which together with the types of controls expected to be implemented at
the subservice organization and incorporated in the design of the system, if operating effectively ,
were those necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services criteria were met,
operated effectively throughout the period [date] to [date].
XYZ Service Organization complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices
throughout the period [date] to [date] if the subservice organization complied with those aspects of
such privacy practices that it performed.
All other report paragraphs are unchanged.
Denial of Conclusion When the Service Organization Uses the Carve-
Out Method to Present a Subservice Organization
If the service auditor denies a conclusion because of matters related to the carved-out subservice
organization, such as those described in paragraph 3.38 of this Guide (for example, because the subservice
organization performs important control procedures that are necessary for the service organization to meet the
applicable trust services criteria), the service auditor’s report should not identify the procedures that were
performed or include statements describing the characteristics of a service auditor’s engagement because to do
so might overshadow the disclaimer. The service auditor would describe the carve-out using an additional
paragraph following the scope paragraph (see the illustration in paragraph 4.37). When denial of conclusion is
required in such circumstances, the service auditor would add a paragraph to the service auditor’s report that
describes the reason for the disclaimer and any deficiencies identified by the service auditor. The following is an
example of such a paragraph: (new language is shown in boldface italics):4.40
The accompanying description of XYZ Service Organization’s system indicates that
responsibility for important aspects of the personal information life cycle, the controls required
for the service organization to meet the trust services criteria applicable to the privacy principle,
and performing activities to determine compliance with the commitments in the service
organization’s statement of privacy practices has been delegated to the subservice organization.
Such matters were not included in the scope of our audit.
When denying a conclusion, in addition to adding such a paragraph to the service auditor’s report, the opinion
paragraph would be replaced by the following denial of conclusion: (new language is shown in boldface italics):
Because of the matter described in the preceding paragraph, the scope of our work was not
sufficient to enable us to express, and we do not express, an opinion.
Reporting When the Service Organization Uses the Inclusive Method
to Present a Subservice Organization
Following are modifications to a service auditor’s type 2 report for use in engagements in which the
service organization uses a subservice organization and presents its description using the inclusive method (new
language is shown in boldface italics; deleted language is shown in strikethrough):
Scope
We have audited the attached description titled “XYZ Service Organization’s and ABC Subservice
Organization’s Description of the Adaptable Cloud Computing System for the Period January 1, 20X1, to
December 31, 20X1” (the description) and the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls to
meet the criteria for the security , availability , processing integrity and confidentiality principles set forth in Trust
Services Principles and Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality and
(applicable trust services criteria), throughout the period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1. ABC
Subservice Organization is an independent service organization that provides certain computer
processing services to XYZ Service Organization. XYZ Service Organization’s description includes a
description of those elements of its system provided by ABC Subservice Organization, the controls of
which help meet certain applicable trust services criteria .
Service organization’s and subservice organization’s responsibilities
XYZ Service Organization and ABC Subservice Organization  have provided their attached assertions titled
[title of service organization’ s assertion] and [title of subservice organization’ s assertion], which is
 are
based on the criteria identified in those management’s assertions. XYZ Service Organization and ABC
Subservice Organization is are responsible for (1) preparing the description and the assertions; (2) the
completeness, accuracy and method of presentation of both the description and assertions; (3) providing the
services covered by the description; (4) specifying the controls that meet the applicable trust services criteria1.
2.
3.
and stating them in the description; and (5) designing, implementing and documenting the controls to meet the
applicable trust services criteria.
Service auditor’ s responsibilities
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the fairness of the presentation of the description based on the
description criteria set forth in XYZ Service Organization’s and ABC Subservice Organization’s  assertions
and on the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of the controls to achieve the applicable trust
services criteria, based on our audit. We conducted our audit in accordance with CPA Canada Handbook –
Assurance Section 5025, Standards for Assurance Engagements Other than Audits of Financial
Statements and Other Historical Financial Information. Those standards require that we plan and perform
our audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether, in all material respects, (1) the description is fairly
presented based on the description criteria, and (2) the controls were suitably designed and operating effectively
to achieve the applicable trust services criteria throughout the period [date] to [date].
Inherent limitations
Because of their nature, controls at a service organization or subservice organization may not always operate
effectively to meet the applicable trust services criteria. Also, the projection to the future of any evaluation of the
fairness of the presentation of the description or conclusions about the suitability of the design or operating
effectiveness of the controls to meet the applicable trust services criteria is subject to the risks that the system
may change or that controls at a service organization or subservice organization may become inadequate or
fail.
Opinion
In our opinion, in all material respects, based on the criteria described in XYZ Service Organization’s and ABC
Subservice Organization’s assertions
the description fairly presents XYZ Service Organization’s [type or name of] system and the
elements of the system provided by ABC Subservice Organization  that were designed and
implemented throughout the period [date] to [date].
the controls of XYZ Service Organization and ABC Subservice Organization  stated in the
description were suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services
criteria would be achieved if the controls operated effectively throughout the period [date] to [date].
the controls of XYZ Service Organization and ABC Subservice Organization  that were tested,
which were those necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services criteria were
achieved, operated effectively throughout the period [date] to [date].
Restricted use
This report and the description of tests of controls and the results thereof are intended solely for the information
and use of XYZ Service Organization and ABC Subservice Organization ; user entities of XYZ Service4.41
4.42
Organization’s [type or name of] system and those prospective user entities, independent auditors and
practitioners providing services to such user entities and regulators who have sufficient knowledge and
understanding of
the nature of the service provided by the service organization.
how the service organization’s system interacts with user entities, subservice organizations and other parties.
internal control and its limitations.
complementary user-entity controls and how they interact with related controls at the service organization
and subservice organization to meet the applicable trust services criteria.
the applicable trust services criteria.
the risks that may threaten the achievement of the applicable trust services criteria and how controls address
those risks.
This report is not intended to be, and should not be, used by anyone other than these specified parties.
Intended Users of the Report
Paragraph .40 of Handbook Section 5025 includes the following discussion of the circumstances in
which a report is intended solely for the information and use of specified parties:
When generally accepted criteria consistent with the objective of the engagement exist, the practitioner
should use them in forming his or her conclusion except when, and only when, the intended users of the
practitioner’s report are an identifiable limited group of users and he or she is satisfied such users agree
their needs are met by using criteria other than generally accepted criteria. In such cases, the practitioner’s
report should not include a reservation with respect to generally accepted criteria but should include a
caution that the report is intended only for the use of the intended users.
SOC 2 reports have the potential to be misunderstood when taken out of the context in which they
were intended to be used. Accordingly , the service auditor’s report should include a statement indicating that the
report is intended solely for the information and use of management of the service organization and other
specified parties that have sufficient knowledge and understanding of the following:
The nature of the service provided by the service organization
How the service organization’s system interacts with user entities, subservice organizations and other parties
Internal control and its limitations
Complementary user-entity controls and how they interact with related controls at the service organization to
meet the applicable trust services criteria
The applicable trust services criteria
The risks that may threaten the achievement of the applicable trust services criteria and how controls address
those risks
User entities commonly are specified parties. However, in some instances (for example, when the report is
intended for use by a regulator), user entities may not be a specified party . If the service organization distributes4.43
4.44
4.45
4.46
1
2
3
the report for general marketing purposes, a greater likelihood exists that some users of the report will not have
the required knowledge and may misunderstand the report.
Report users who are most likely to have such knowledge include management of the service
organization; management of the user entities; practitioners evaluating or reporting on controls at a user entity;
regulators; and others performing services related to controls at the service organization, such as a service
auditor reporting on controls at a user entity that is also a service provider to other user entities.
Management of a prospective user entity may need to obtain an understanding of a service
organization’s system related to security , availability , processing integrity , confidentiality or privacy and the
historic operating effectiveness of controls at the service organization, either as part of its vendor selection
process or to comply with regulatory requirements for vendor acceptance. To understand and make
appropriate use of a SOC 2 report, management of a prospective user entity will need the knowledge and
understanding identified in paragraph 4.42. When management of a prospective user entity has such knowledge,
a SOC 2 report is likely to be helpful to management in evaluating the service organization’s system and
controls. Accordingly , management of a prospective user entity that has such knowledge would be an
appropriate user of a SOC 2 report. Conversely , management of a prospective user entity that does not have
such knowledge is unlikely to be an appropriate user of such a report. When certain prospective user entities
are intended users of the report, the service auditor’s identification of the intended users of the report should
include the knowledge and understanding identified in paragraph 4.42.
Illustrative Type 2 Reports
Although this Guide specifies the information to be included in a description of a service organization’s
system, it is not specific about the format for these reports. Service organizations and service auditors may
organize and present the required information in a variety of formats.
Appendix C, “Illustrative Management Assertions and Related Service Auditor’s Reports on Controls
at a Service Organization Relevant to Security , Availability , Processing Integrity , Confidentiality and Privacy ,” of
this Guide contains two examples of type 2 reports. These reports illustrate the following:
A type 2 report on controls at a service organization relevant to security , availability , processing integrity and
confidentiality
A type 2 report on controls at a service organization relevant to privacy
For brevity, the word tests as used hereinafter refers to tests of the operating effectiveness of controls or tests of the serv ice organization’s
compliance with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices, unless otherwise specified.
See paragraph A39 of CSAE 3416 for similar guidance related to internal control over financial reporting.
The title of the description of the service organization’s system in the service auditor’s report should match the title used by management of
the service organization in its description.Appendix A
Information for Management of a Service Organization
Introduction and Background
Many entities function more efficiently and profitably by outsourcing tasks or entire functions to other
organizations (service organizations) that have the personnel, expertise, equipment or technology to accomplish
these tasks or functions. Many of these service organizations collect, process, transmit, store, organize, maintain
and dispose of information for other entities. Entities that use service organizations are known as user entities.
Examples of the services provided by service organizations include the following:
Cloud computing. Providing on-demand access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (for
example, networks, servers, storage and applications). Additional information about cloud computing is
presented in Appendix E, “Reporting on Controls at a Cloud Computing Service Organization.”
Managed security. Managing access to networks and computing systems for user entities (for example,
granting access to a system and preventing, or detecting and mitigating, system intrusion).
Financial services customer accounting. Processing financial transactions on behalf of customers of a bank
or investment company . Examples of this service are processing customer securities transactions, maintaining
customer account records, providing customers with confirmations of transactions and statements and
providing these and related customer services through the Internet.
Customer support. Providing customers of user entities with online or telephonic post-sales support and
service management. Examples of these services are warranty inquiries and investigating and responding to
customer complaints.
Sales force automation. Providing and maintaining software to automate business tasks for user entities that
have a sales force. Examples of such tasks are order processing, information sharing, order tracking, contact
management, customer management, sales forecast analysis and employee performance evaluation.
Health care claims management and processing. Providing medical providers, employers and insured
parties of employers with systems that enable medical records and related health insurance claims to be
processed securely and confidentially .
Enterprise IT outsourcing services. Managing, operating, and maintaining user entities’ IT data centers,infrastructure and application systems and related functions that support IT activities, such as network,
production, security, change management, hardware and environmental control activities.
One of the critical roles of management and those charged with governance in any entity is to identify and assess
risks to the entity and address those risks through effective internal control. When an entity outsources tasks or
functions to a service organization and becomes a user entity , it replaces many of the risks associated with
performing those tasks or functions with risks associated with outsourcing, particularly risks related to how the
service organization performs the tasks or functions and how that may affect the user entity’s compliance with
requirements. Although a task or function is outsourced, management of the user entity retains responsibility for
managing these risks and needs to monitor the services provided by the service organization.
To carry out its responsibilities related to the outsourced tasks or functions, management of a user entity needs
information about the system by which the service organization provides services, including the service
organization’s controls
1 over that system. User-entity management may also wish to obtain assurance that the
system information provided by the service organization is accurate and that the service organization actually
operates in accordance with that information.
To obtain assurance, user entities often ask the service organization for an auditor’s report on the service
organization’s system. Historically , such requests have focused on controls at the service organization that affect
user entities’ financial reporting. However, user entities are now requesting reports that address the security ,
availability or processing integrity of the system or the confidentiality or privacy of the information processed by
the system. In this document, these attributes of a system are referred to as principles.
CPA Canada is alerting practitioners to the various types of engagements that a practitioner may perform when
reporting on controls at a service organization and has identified these reports as service organization controls
(SOC) reports. The objective of this effort is to help practitioners select the appropriate reporting option
depending on the subject matter addressed by the controls. The following three types of SOC reports are
designed to help practitioners meet specific service organization and user entity needs:
SOC 1 report. These reports are intended to meet the needs of entities that use service organizations (user
entities) and the practitioners who audit the user entities’ financial statements (user auditors) when evaluating
the effect of controls at the service organization on the user entities’ financial statements. User auditors use
these reports to plan and perform audits of the user entities’ financial statements. SOC 1 engagements are
conducted in accordance with Canadian Standards for Assurance Engagements (CSAE) 3416, Reporting
on Controls at a Service Organization.
SOC 2 report. These reports are intended to meet the needs of a broad range of users who need information
and assurance about controls at a service organization that affect the security , availability or processing
integrity of the systems that the service organization uses to process users’ data or the confidentiality or
privacy of the information processed by these systems. Examples of stakeholders who may need these
reports are management or those charged with governance of the user entities and service organization,
customers of the service organization, regulators, business partners, suppliers and others who have an1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
understanding of the service organization and its controls. These reports include a detailed description of the
service organization’s system; the criteria in Trust Services Principles and Criteria for Security , Availability ,
Processing Integrity , Confidentiality and Privacy applicable to the principle being reported on; the controls
designed to meet these criteria; a written assertion by management regarding the description and the design
and operation of the controls; and a service auditor’s report (the letter) in which the service auditor expresses
an opinion on whether the description is fairly presented and the controls are suitability designed and
operating effectively . The report also includes the service auditor’s description of tests performed and results
of the tests. These reports can play an important role in the following:
V endor management programs
2
Internal corporate governance and risk management processes
Regulatory compliance
These engagements are conducted in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, and
specifically Handbook Section 5025, Standards For Assurance Engagements Other Than Audits of
Financial Statements and Other Historical Financial Information.
SOC 3 report. These reports are designed to meet the needs of a wider range of users who need assurance
about controls at a service organization that affect the security , availability , or processing integrity of the
systems used by a service organization to process users’ information or the confidentiality or privacy of that
information, but do not have the need for, or knowledge necessary to effectively use, a SOC 2 report. These
reports comprise a written assertion by management regarding the suitability of the design and operation of
the controls implemented, an auditor’s report on the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of the
controls and a description of the system and its boundaries. This description generally is brief and does not
include the detail provided in a SOC 2 system description. The criteria for evaluating the controls are the
criteria in Trust Services Principles that are relevant to the principle being reported on (the same criteria as in
a SOC 2 report). Because they are general-use reports, SOC 3 reports can be freely distributed or posted
on a website. If the report is unqualified, the service organization is eligible to display on its website the
SysTrust for Service Organizations seal. For more information about the SysTrust for Service Organization
seal program, go to www .webtrust.org
.
The Trust Service Principles
The following are the five attributes of a reliable system,3 which are also referred as the trust services
principles:
Security. The system is protected against unauthorized access (both physical and logical).
Availability. The system is available for operation and use as committed or agreed.
Processing integrity. System processing is complete, accurate, timely and authorized.
Confidentiality. Information designated as confidential is protected as committed or agreed.
Privacy. Personal information4 is collected, used, retained, disclosed and disposed of in conformity
with the commitments in the entity’s privacy notice and criteria set forth in Generally Accepted Privacy
Principles issued jointly by the AICPA and CPA Canada.
In a SOC 2 engagement, management of the service organization selects the trust services principle(s) that will
be covered by the SOC 2 report. The trust services criteria for the principle(s) covered by the report are
referred to as the applicable trust services criteria.
Service organization management implements controls over its systems to prevent adverse events from occurrin
g
or detect such events as errors, privacy breaches and theft or loss of information. For example, a control that
terminates access to a system after three unsuccessful login attempts is designed to prevent unauthorized access
to the system. Management of the service organization may engage a practitioner to report on the design and
operating effectiveness of controls over its systems. Controls that are suitably designed are able to meet the
criteria they were designed to meet if they operate effectively . Controls that operate effectively actually do meet
the criteria they were designed to meet over a period of time.
This Guide provides guidance to a service auditor examining and reporting on the fairness of the presentation of
a description of a service organization’s system; the suitability of the design of the service organization’s controls
over the system as they relate to one or more of the trust services principles; and, in certain reports, the
operating effectiveness of those controls. The remainder of this appendix is intended to
assist management of a service organization in preparing its description of the service organization’s system
which serves as the basis for a SOC 2 audit engagement.
familiarize management with its responsibilities when it engages a service auditor to perform a SOC 2
engagement.
This appendix is not intended to provide guidance to
management of a service organization in preparing the description of a service organization’s system for a
SOC 1 or SOC 3 report.
management of a user entity in assessing a service organization’s controls that are likely to be relevant to user
entities’ internal control over financial reporting.
auditors of user entities (user auditors) in planning and performing an audit of a user entity’s financial
statements.
In the remainder of this appendix, references to controls over a system mean controls over a system related to
one or more of the trust services principles.
Responsibilities of Management of a Service Organization
In a SOC 2 engagement, management of a service organization is responsible for the following:
Determining the type of engagement to be performed; which principle(s) will be addressed in the engagement;
the scope of the engagement, as discussed in the first paragraph of the “Defining the Scope of theEngagement” section of this appendix; and whether any subservice organizations will be included in, or
carved out of, the description and the service auditor’s report. (Subservice organizations are organizations
to which the service organization outsources aspects of the services that it provides.)
Preparing a description of the service organization’s system.
Providing a written assertion.
Providing written representations.
Having a reasonable basis for its assertion.
Determining the Type of Engagement to Be Performed
This Guide provides for the following two types of SOC 2 engagements and related reports:
Report on management’s description of a service organization’s system and the suitability of the design of
controls (referred to as a type 1 report)
Report on management’s description of a service organization’s system and the suitability of the design and
operating effectiveness of controls (referred to as a type 2 report)
Both type 1 and type 2 reports include the following:
Management’s description of the service organization’s system
A written assertion by management of the service organization about the matters in the first paragraph of the
“Providing a Written Assertion” section of this appendix.
A service auditor’s report that expresses an opinion on the matters in the first paragraph of the “Providing a
Written Assertion” section of this appendix.
A type 2 report also contains a description of the service auditor’s tests of the controls and the results of the
tests and, when the report addresses the privacy principle, a description of the service auditor’s tests of the
service organization’s compliance with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices and the results of
those tests.
Management’s written assertion is attached to the description of the service organization’s system.
A type 1 report, which does not include tests of the operating effectiveness of controls, provides user entities
with information that will enable them to understand and assess the design of the controls. However, a type 1
report does not provide sufficient information for user entities to assess the operating effectiveness of the
controls. A type 1 report may be useful if the service organization
5
has not been in operation for a sufficient length of time to enable the service auditor to gather sufficient
appropriate evidence regarding the operating effectiveness of controls.
has recently made significant changes to the system and related controls and does not have a sufficient history
with a stable system to enable a type 2 engagement to be performed.Defining the Scope of the Engagement
In determining the scope of a SOC 2 engagement, management of a service organization considers the
following:
The services, business units, functional areas, business processes and activities or applications that will be of
interest to users because of concerns regarding compliance with laws or regulations or governance or
because the service organization has made commitments to user entities to provide a type 1 or type 2 report.
The trust services principles that will be covered by the report. Management makes this determination by
understanding the needs of report users and the service organization’s goals in engaging a service auditor to
perform the audit. The engagement may cover one, multiple or all of the principles.
The period to be covered by the description and report (for a type 1 report, this would be the “as of” date of
the description and report).
Whether controls at subservice organizations are relevant to meeting one or more of the applicable trust
services criteria. (Subservice organizations may be separate entities from the service organization or entities
related to the service organization.)
To increase the likelihood that the description and service auditor’s report will be useful to report users,
management of the service organization may wish to discuss with user entities matters such as the services, trust
services principles and period or “as of” date to be covered by the description and service auditor’s report.
If a service organization uses a subservice organization, the description of the service organization’s system may
either (a) include the subservice organization’s services by using the inclusive method or (b) exclude the
subservice organization’s services by using the carve-out method.
When the carve-out method is used, management’s description of the service organization’s system identifies the
nature of the services and functions performed by the subservice organization and the types of controls that
management expects to be implemented at the subservice organization but excludes details of the subservice
organization’s system and controls.
A service organization’s description prepared using the carve-out method is generally most useful if the services
provided by the subservice organization are not extensive or if a type 1 or type 2 report that meets the needs of
user entities is available from the subservice organization.
When the inclusive method is used, management’s description of the service organization’s system includes a
description of the nature of the services and functions performed by the subservice organization, as well the
applicable trust services criteria and controls implemented by the subservice organization. Controls of the
service organization are presented separately from those of the subservice organization.
Although the inclusive method provides more information for user entities, it may not be appropriate or feasiblein all circumstances. In determining which approach to use, the service organization considers (a) the nature and
extent of the information about the subservice organization that user entities may need and (b) the practical
difficulties entailed in implementing the inclusive method.
The inclusive method is difficult to implement in certain circumstances. The approach entails extensive planning
and communication among the service auditor, the service organization and the subservice organization. If a
service organization wishes to use the inclusive method of presentation, matters such as the following generally
will need to be coordinated by all the parties involved, preferably in advance:
The scope of the description and the timing of the audit and tests of controls
Responsibility for preparing the section of the description that relates to the services provided by the
subservice organization
The content of the subservice organization’s written representations and the members of the subservice
organization’s management who will be responsible for the written representations
An agreement regarding access to the subservice organization’s premises, personnel and systems
Fees
Identification of the parties for whom use of the report is intended
These issues become more complex if multiple subservice organizations are involved, and the inclusive method is
used. The inclusive approach is facilitated if the service organization and subservice organization are related
parties or have a contractual relationship that provides for inclusive reports and visits by service auditors.
If more than one subservice organization is relevant to user entities, management of the service organization may
use the inclusive method for one or more subservice organizations and the carve-out method for one or more of
the other subservice organizations.
If the service organization uses the inclusive method, the service organization would obtain a written assertion
from management of the subservice organization covering the subservice organization’s services. That assertion
would also be attached to the description of the service organization’s system. If management of the subservice
organization will not provide a written assertion, the service organization cannot use the inclusive method but
may instead be able to use the carve-out method.
If the service organization’s controls and monitoring of the activities of a subservice organization are sufficient to
meet the applicable trust services criteria, the controls at the subservice organization are not necessary to meet
those criteria. In such instances, the service organization’s assertion is based solely on controls at the service
organization, and consequently , neither the inclusive nor carve-out method is applicable. In these situations, the
description need not describe the subservice organization’s activities, unless such information is needed to help
users understand the service organization’s system.
Preparing the Description of the Service Organization’s System
Management of a service organization is responsible for preparing the description, including the completeness,accuracy and method of presentation of the description. No one particular format for the description is
prescribed, and the extent of the description may vary , depending on the size and complexity of the service
organization and its activities. The description may be presented using various formats, such as narratives,
flowcharts, tables and graphics, but should meet the criteria set forth in the “Criteria for Management’s
Description of the Service Organization’s System” section of this appendix.
Appendix B, “Trust Services Principles and Criteria for Security , Availability , Processing Integrity ,
Confidentiality and Privacy ,” of this Guide contains the control criteria for each of the trust services principles.
All the criteria related to the trust services principle(s) being reported on (applicable trust services criteria)
should be included in management’s description. For example, if a service auditor is reporting on the design and
operating effectiveness of controls at a service organization relevant to the security of user entities’ information,
all the control criteria related to security should be addressed by the description. If the description does not
describe controls for one or more control criteria, the description should include an explanation of why such
criteria are not addressed by a control. Omission of controls related to one or more of the applicable trust
services criteria would be appropriate if the omitted criteria are not applicable to the services provided by the
service organization.
For example, in an engagement to report on the privacy principle in which personal information is collected from
individuals by user entities (not the service organization), it would be appropriate to omit controls for the criteria
related to collection and describe the reason for such omission. However, for certain criteria, a policy
prohibiting certain activities is not sufficient to render a criterion not applicable. For example, in a SOC 2 report
that addresses the privacy principle, it would not be appropriate for a service organization to omit controls for
the criteria related to disclosure of personal information to third parties based only on the fact that the service
organization’s policies forbid such disclosure. Such policies would need to be suitably designed, implemented
and operating effectively to conclude that they prevent such disclosure.
The description need not address every aspect of the service organization’s system or the services provided to
user entities. Certain aspects of the services provided may not be relevant to user entities or may be beyond the
scope of the engagement. For example, a service organization’s processes related to availability are not likely to
be relevant in an engagement that addresses only the security principle. Similarly , although the description should
include procedures within both manual and automated systems by which services are provided, it need not
necessarily include every step in the process.
The description needs to meet certain criteria in order to be fairly presented. These criteria are set forth in the
“Criteria for Management’s Description of the Service Organization’s System” section of this appendix. As a
part of the SOC 2 engagement, the service auditor evaluates the fairness of the presentation of the description
using these criteria.
Providing a Written Assertion
Management of the service organization prepares a written assertion that is to be attached to the description of1.
2.
3.
4.
the service organization’s system. In its assertion, management confirms, to the best of its knowledge and belief,
that
management’s description of the service organization’s system fairly presents the service
organization’s system that was designed and implemented throughout the specified period, based on the
criteria in the “Criteria for Management’s Description of the Service Organization’s System” section of this
appendix.
the controls stated in management’s description of the service organization’s system were suitably
designed throughout the specified period to meet the applicable trust services criteria.
the controls stated in management’s description of the service organization’s system operated
effectively throughout the specified period to meet the applicable trust services criteria (type 2 report only).
when management’s description of the service organization’s system includes controls over privacy ,
the service organization complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices throughout the
specified period (type 2 report only).
Management of the service organization needs to have a reasonable basis for its written assertion, which
typically is based on management’s monitoring activities and other procedures.
Management’s monitoring activities may provide a portion of the basis for making its assertion regarding the
design and operating effectiveness of controls or may be a sufficient basis on its own. Monitoring of controls is a
process to assess the effectiveness of internal control performance over time. It involves assessing the
effectiveness of controls on a timely basis, identifying and reporting deficiencies to appropriate individuals within
the service organization, and taking necessary corrective actions. Management accomplishes monitoring of
controls through ongoing activities, separate evaluations or a combination of the two. Ongoing monitoring
activities are often built into the normal recurring activities of an entity and include regular management and
supervisory activities. Internal auditors or personnel performing similar functions may contribute to the
monitoring of a service organization’s activities. Monitoring activities may also include using information
communicated by external parties, such as customer complaints and regulator comments, which may indicate
problems or highlight areas in need of improvement. The greater the degree and effectiveness of ongoing
monitoring, the less need for separate evaluations. Usually , some combination of ongoing monitoring and
separate evaluations will help ensure that internal control maintains its effectiveness over time. The service
auditor’s report on controls is not a substitute for the service organization’s own processes that provide a
reasonable basis for its assertion.
When monitoring does not provide a basis for management’s assertion regarding the design and operating
effectiveness of controls, service organization management may need to perform its own tests of the service
organization’s controls.
Additional Management Responsibilities
The following are some of the additional responsibilities that management of the service organization will havethroughout the engagement:
Providing access to all information, such as information in records, documentation, service level agreements,
internal audit reports and other reports that management is aware of, that is relevant to the description of the
service organization’s system or the design and operating effectiveness of controls and management’s
assertion.
Providing additional information that the service auditor may request from management for the purpose of the
audit engagement.
Providing unrestricted access to personnel within the service organization from whom the service auditor
determines it is necessary to obtain evidence relevant to the service auditor’s engagement.
Disclosing to the service auditor any deficiencies in the design of controls of which management is aware.
Disclosing to the service auditor all instances of which management is aware when controls have not operated
with sufficient effectiveness to meet the applicable trust services criteria.
Disclosing to the service auditor incidents of noncompliance with laws and regulations, fraud, or uncorrected
errors attributable to management or other service organization personnel that are clearly not trivial and may
affect one or more user entities and whether such incidents have been communicated appropriately to
affected user entities.
Providing written representations at the conclusion of the engagement. When the inclusive method is used,
management of the service organization and subservice organization are responsible for providing separate
representations. In its representations, management includes statements that
reaffirm its written assertion attached to the description.
the service organization has provided the service auditor with all relevant information and the
access agreed to.
the service organization has disclosed to the service auditor any of the following of which it is
aware:
Instances of noncompliance with laws or regulations or uncorrected errors attributable
to the service organization that may affect one or more user entities.
Knowledge of any actual, suspected, or alleged intentional acts by management of the
service organization or its employees that could adversely affect the fairness of the
presentation of management’s description of the service organization’s system or
whether the controls stated in the description were suitably designed and operating
effectively to meet the applicable trust services criteria.
Deficiencies in the design of controls.
Instances when controls have not operated as described.
Any events subsequent to the period covered by management’s description of the
service organization’s system up to the date of the service auditor’s report that could
1.
a.
b.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
c.
d.
e.
f.
i.
ii.
g.
i.
ii.
h.
i.
have a significant effect on management’s assertion or the fact that no such subsequent
events have occurred.
Criteria for Management’s Description of the Service Organization’s
System
The criteria for determining whether the description of the service organization’s system is fairly presented are as
follows:
The description contains the following information:
The types of services provided
The components of the system used to provide the services, which are the following:
Infrastructure. The physical and hardware components of a system (facilities, equipment
and networks).
Software. The programs and operating software of a system (systems, applications and
utilities).
People. The personnel involved in the operation and use of a system (developers,
operators, users and managers).
Procedures. The automated and manual procedures involved in the operation of a system.
Data. The information used and supported by a system (transaction streams, files,
databases and tables).
The boundaries of the system covered by the description
How the service organization’s system captures and addresses significant events and conditions
6
The process used to prepare and deliver reports and other information to user entities and other
parties
For information provided to, or received from, subservice organizations and other parties
how the information is provided or received and the role of the subservice organizations
and other parties
the procedures that the service organization performs to determine that such information
and its processing, maintenance and storage are subject to appropriate controls
For each principle being reported on, the related criteria in Trust Services Principles
(applicable trust services criteria) and the related controls designed to meet those criteria, including,
as applicable, the following:
Complementary user-entity controls contemplated in the design of the service
organization’s system
When the inclusive method is used to present a subservice organization, controls at the
subservice organization
If the service organization presents the subservice organization using the carve-out method
the nature of the services provided by the subservice organizationii.
iii.
iv.
i.
j.
k.
2.
3.
a.
b.
c.
d.
i.
ii.
e.
any aspects of the personal information life cycle for which responsibility has been
delegated to the subservice organization
each of the applicable trust services criteria that are intended to be met by controls at the
subservice organization, alone or in combination with controls at the service organization, and
the types of controls expected to be implemented at carved-out subservice organizations to
meet those criteria
when the report addresses the privacy principle, the types of activities that the subservice
organization would need to perform to comply with the service organization’s privacy
commitments
Identifying any applicable trust services criteria that are not addressed by a control at the service
organization or subservice organization and the reasons therefore
Other aspects of the service organization’s control environment, risk assessment process,
information and communication systems and monitoring of controls that are relevant to the services
provided and the applicable trust services criteria
In the case of a type 2 report, relevant details of changes to the service organization’s system
during the period covered by the description
The description does not omit or distort information relevant to the service organization’s system
while acknowledging that the description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range of users
and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the system that each individual user may consider
important to his or her own particular needs.
For engagements to report on the privacy principle
the types of personal information collected from individuals or obtained from user entities or
other parties
7 and how such information is collected and, if collected by user entities, how it is
obtained by the service organization.
the process for (1) identifying specific requirements in agreements with user entities and laws
and regulations applicable to the personal information and (2) implementing controls and practices to
meet those requirements.
if the service organization provides the privacy notice to individuals about whom personal
information is collected, used, retained, disclosed and disposed of or anonymized, the privacy notice
prepared in conformity with the relevant criteria for a privacy notice set forth in Trust Services
Principles.
if the service organization presents the subservice organization using the carve-out method
any aspects of the personal information life cycle for which responsibility has been
delegated to the subservice organization and
the types of activities that the subservice organization would need to perform to comply
with the service organization’s privacy commitments.
if the user entities, rather than the service organization, are responsible for providing the privacy
notice to individuals, a statement regarding how the privacy notice is communicated to individuals,i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.
x.
f.
1
2
3
4
5
that the user entities are responsible for communicating such notice to individuals and that the service
organization is responsible for communicating its privacy practices to the user entities in its statement
of privacy practices, which includes the following information:
A summary of the significant privacy and related security requirements common to most
agreements between the service organization and its user entities and any requirements in a
particular user entity’s agreement that the service organization meets for all or most user entities
A summary of the significant privacy and related security requirements mandated by law,
regulation, industry or market requirements that are not included in user-entity agreements but
that the service organization meets for all or most user entities
The purposes, uses, and disclosures of personal information as permitted by user-entity
agreements and beyond those permitted by such agreements but not prohibited by such
agreements and the service organization’s commitments regarding the purpose, use, and
disclosure of personal information that are prohibited by such agreements
A statement that the information will be retained for a period no longer than necessary to
fulfill the stated purposes or contractual requirements or for the period required by law or
regulation, as applicable, or a statement describing other retention practices
A statement that the information will be disposed of in a manner that prevents loss, theft,
misuse or unauthorized access to the information
If applicable, how the service organization supports any process permitted by user entities
for individuals to obtain access to their information to review, update or correct it
If applicable, a description of the process to determine that personal information is
accurate and complete and how the service organization implements correction processes
permitted by user entities
If applicable, how inquiries, complaints and disputes from individuals (whether directly
from the individual or indirectly through user entities) regarding their personal information are
handled by the service organization
A statement regarding the existence of a written security program and what industry or
other standards it is based on
Other relevant information related to privacy practices deemed appropriate for user
entities by the service organization
if the user entities, rather than the service organization, are responsible for providing the privacy
notice to individuals, the service organization’s statement of privacy practices.
From a governance and internal control perspective, controls are policies and procedures that address risks associated with financial reporting,
operations or compliance and, when operating effectively, enable an entity to meet specified criteria.
Vendor management, in this context, is a user entity’s management of the services provided by a service organization.
A reliable system is defined in Trust Services Principles and Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, as a
system that is capable of operating without material error, fault or failure during a specified period in a specified environment.
Personal information (sometimes referred to as personally identifiable information) is information that is about, or can be related to, an
identifiable individual.
A user of a type 1 report may misunderstand the nature of the engagement and incorrectly assume that controls are operating effectively or
that the entity has complied with the practices in its privacy notice, even though the service auditor has not provided such an  opinion or6
7
performed sufficient procedures to express such an opinion. When the report user is a regulatory agency or body, this misunderstanding may
result in regulatory compliance risk, particularly in a report that addresses the privacy principle.
For example, the setup of access rights for new users of the system.
An example of an entity that collects personal information from user entities is a credit-reporting bureau that maintains information about the
creditworthiness of individuals.a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
Appendix B
Trust Services Principles and Criteria for Security, Availability,
Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, and Privacy
Security Principle and Criteria Table
The system is protected against unauthorized access (both physical and logical)
Criteria
1.0 Policies: The entity defines and documents its policies for the security of its system.
1.1 The entity’s security policies are established and periodically reviewed and approved by a designated
individual or group.
1.2 The entity’s security policies include, but may not be limited to, the following matters:
Identifying and documenting the security requirements of authorized users
Classifying data based on its criticality and sensitivity . That classification is used to define
protection requirements, access rights and access restrictions, and retention and destruction
requirements
Assessing risks on a periodic basis
Preventing unauthorized access
Adding new users, modifying the access levels of existing users and removing users who no longer
need access
Assigning responsibility and accountability for system security
Assigning responsibility and accountability for system changes and maintenance
Testing, evaluating, and authorizing system components before implementation
Addressing how complaints and requests relating to security issues are resolved
Identifying and mitigating security breaches and other incidents
Providing for training and other resources to support its system security policiesl.
m.
n.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
Providing for the handling of exceptions and situations not specifically addressed in its system
security policies
Providing for the identification of and consistency with applicable laws and regulations, defined
commitments, service-level agreements and other contractual requirements
Providing for sharing information with third parties
1.3 Responsibility and accountability for developing and maintaining the entity’s system security policies, and
changes and updates to those policies, are assigned.
2.0 Communications: The entity communicates its defined system security policies to responsible
parties and authorized users.
2.1 The entity has prepared an objective description of the system and its boundaries and communicated such
description to authorized users.
2.2 The security obligations of users and the entity’s security commitments to users are communicated to
authorized users.
2.3 Responsibility and accountability for the entity’s system security policies and changes and updates to those
policies are communicated to entity personnel responsible for implementing them.
2.4 The process for informing the entity about breaches of the system security and for submitting complaints is
communicated to authorized users.
2.5 Changes that may affect system security are communicated to management and users who will be affected.
3.0 Pr ocedur es: The entity placed in oper ation pr ocedur es to achieve its docum ented system  secur ity
objectives in accordance with its defined policies.
3.1 Procedures exist to (1) identify potential threats of disruption to systems operation that would impair system
security commitments and (2) assess the risks associated with the identified threats.
3.2 Procedures exist to restrict logical access to the defined system including, but not limited to, the following
matters:
Logical access security measures to restrict access to information resources not deemed to be
public.
Identification and authentication of users.
Registration and authorization of new users.
The process to make changes and updates to user profiles.
Distribution of output restricted to authorized users.
Restriction of access to offline storage, backup data, systems and media.
Restriction of access to system configurations, superuser functionality , master passwords, powerful
utilities and security devices (for example, firewalls).3.3 Procedures exist to restrict physical access to the defined system including, but not limited to, facilities,
backup media and other system components such as firewalls, routers and servers.
3.4 Procedures exist to protect against unauthorized access to system resources.
3.5 Procedures exist to protect against infection by computer viruses, malicious code and unauthorized
software.
3.6 Encryption or other equivalent security techniques are used to protect user authentication information and
the corresponding session transmitted over the Internet or other public networks.
Criteria related to execution and incident management used to achieve objectives
3.7 Procedures exist to identify , report and act upon system security breaches and other incidents.
Cr iter ia r elated to the system  com ponents used to achieve the obj ectives
3.8 Procedures exist to classify data in accordance with classification policies and periodically monitor and
update such classifications as necessary.
3.9 Procedures exist to provide that issues of noncompliance with security policies are promptly addressed and
that corrective measures are taken on a timely basis.
3.10 Design, acquisition, implementation, configuration, modification and management of infrastructure and
software are consistent with defined system security policies to enable authorized access and to prevent
unauthorized access.
3.11 Procedures exist to provide that personnel responsible for the design, development, implementation, and
operation of systems affecting security have the qualifications and resources to fulfill their responsibilities.
Change-management-related criteria applicable to the system’s security
3.12 Procedures exist to maintain system components, including configurations consistent with the defined system
security policies.
3.13 Procedures exist to provide that only authorized, tested and documented changes are made to the system.
3.14 Procedures exist to provide that emergency changes are documented and authorized on a timely basis.
4.0 Monitoring: The entity monitors the system and takes action to maintain compliance with its
defined system security policies.
4.1 The entity’s system security is periodically reviewed and compared with the defined system security policies.
4.2 There is a process to identify and address potential impairments to the entity’s ongoing ability to achieve its
objectives in accordance with its defined system-security policies.
4.3 Environmental, regulatory and technological changes are monitored and their effect on system security is
assessed on a timely basis and policies are updated for that assessment.a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
n.
o.
Availability Principle and Criteria Table
The system is available for operation and use as committed or agreed.
Criteria
1.0 Policies: The entity defines and documents its policies for the security of its system.
1.1 The entity’s security policies are established and periodically reviewed and approved by a designated
individual or group.
1.2 The entity’s security policies include, but may not be limited to, the following matters:
Identifying and documenting the security requirements of authorized users.
Classifying data based on its criticality and sensitivity . That classification is used to define
protection requirements, access rights and access restrictions, and retention and destruction
requirements.
Assessing risks on a periodic basis.
Preventing unauthorized access.
Adding new users, modifying the access levels of existing users and removing users who no longer
need access.
Assigning responsibility and accountability for system availability and related security .
Assigning responsibility and accountability for system changes and maintenance.
Testing, evaluating and authorizing system components before implementation.
Addressing how complaints and requests relating to system availability and related security issues
are resolved.
Identifying and mitigating system availability and related security breaches and other incidents.
Providing for training and other resources to support its system availability and related security
policies.
Providing for the handling of exceptions and situations not specifically addressed in its system
availability and related security policies.
Providing for the identification of, and consistency with, applicable laws and regulations, defined
commitments, service-level agreements and other contractual requirements.
Recovering and continuing service in accordance with documented customer commitments or
other agreements.
Monitoring system capacity to achieve customer commitments or other agreements regarding
availability .a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
1.3 Responsibility and accountability for developing and maintaining the entity’s system availability and related
security policies, and changes and updates to those policies, are assigned.
2.0 Communications: The entity communicates the defined system availability policies to responsible
parties and authorized users.
2.1 The entity has prepared an objective description of the system and its boundaries and communicated such
description to authorized users.
2.2 The availability and related security obligations of users and the entity’s availability and related security
commitments to users are communicated to authorized users.
2.3 Responsibility and accountability for the entity’s system availability and related security policies and changes
and updates to those policies are communicated to entity personnel responsible for implementing them.
2.4 The process for informing the entity about system availability issues and breaches of system security and for
submitting complaints is communicated to authorized users.
2.5 Changes that may affect system availability and system security are communicated to management and users
who will be affected.
3.0 Pr ocedur es: The entity placed in oper ation pr ocedur es to achieve its docum ented system
availability objectives in accordance with its defined policies.
3.1 Procedures exist to (1) identify potential threats of disruptions to systems operation that would impair
system-availability commitments and (2) assess the risks associated with the identified threats.
3.2 Measures to prevent or mitigate threats have been implemented consistent with the risk assessment when
commercially practicable.
3.3 Procedures exist to provide for backup, offsite storage, restoration and disaster recovery consistent with the
entity’s defined system availability and related security policies.
3.4 Procedures exist to provide for the integrity of backup data and systems maintained to support the entity’s
defined system availability and related security policies.
Security-related criteria relevant to the system’s availability
3.5 Procedures exist to restrict logical access to the defined system including, but not limited to, the following
matters:
Logical-access security measures to restrict access to information resources not deemed to be
public.
Identification and authentication of users.
Registration and authorization of new users.
The process to make changes and updates to user profiles.
Restriction of access to offline storage, backup data, systems and media.f. Restriction of access to system configurations, superuser functionality , master passwords, powerful
utilities and security devices (for example, firewalls).
3.6 Procedures exist to restrict physical access to the defined system including, but not limited to, facilities,
backup media and other system components such as firewalls, routers and servers.
3.7 Procedures exist to protect against unauthorized access to system resources.
3.8 Procedures exist to protect against infection by computer viruses, malicious codes and unauthorized
software.
3.9 Encryption or other equivalent security techniques are used to protect user authentication information and
the corresponding session transmitted over the Internet or other public networks.
Criteria related to execution and incident management used to achieve objectives
3.10 Procedures exist to identify , report and act upon system-availability issues and related security breaches and
other incidents.
Cr iter ia r elated to the system  com ponents used to achieve the obj ectives
3.11 Procedures exist to classify data in accordance with classification policies and periodically monitor and
update such classifications as necessary.
3.12 Procedures exist to provide that issues of noncompliance with system availability and related security
policies are promptly addressed and that corrective measures are taken on a timely basis.
3.13 Design, acquisition, implementation, configuration, modification and management of infrastructure and
software are consistent with defined system availability and related security policies.
3.14 Procedures exist to provide that personnel responsible for the design, development, implementation, and
operation of systems affecting availability and security have the qualifications and resources to fulfill their
responsibilities.
Change-management-related criteria applicable to the system’s availability
3.15 Procedures exist to maintain system components, including configurations consistent with the defined system
availability and related security policies.
3.16 Procedures exist to provide that only authorized, tested and documented changes are made to the system.
3.17 Procedures exist to provide that emergency changes are documented and authorized (including after-the-
fact approval).
4.0 Monitoring: The entity monitors the system and takes action to maintain compliance with its
defined system availability policies.
4.1 The entity’s system availability and security performance are periodically reviewed and compared with the
defined system availability and related security policies.
4.2 There is a process to identify and address potential impairments to the entity’s ongoing ability to achieve itsa.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
objectives in accordance with its defined system availability and related security policies.
4.3 Environmental, regulatory and technological changes are monitored, and their effect on system availability
and security is assessed on a timely basis; policies are updated for that assessment.
Processing Integrity Principle and Criteria Table
System processing is complete, accurate, timely , and authorized.
Criteria
1.0 Policies: The entity defines and documents its policies for the security of its system.
1.1 The entity’s security policies are established and periodically reviewed and approved by a designated
individual or group.
1.2 The entity’s security policies include, but may not be limited to, the following matters:
Identifying and documenting the security requirements of authorized users
Classifying data based on its criticality and sensitivity . That classification is used to define
protection requirements, access rights and access restrictions, and retention and destruction
requirements
Assessing risks on a periodic basis
Preventing unauthorized access
Adding new users, modifying the access levels of existing users and removing users who no longer
need access
Assigning responsibility and accountability for system processing integrity and related security
Assigning responsibility and accountability for system changes and maintenance
Testing, evaluating and authorizing system components before implementation
Addressing how complaints and requests relating to system processing integrity and related
security issues are resolved
Identifying and mitigating errors and omissions and other system processing integrity and related
security breaches and other incidents
Providing for training and other resources to support its system processing integrity and related
system security policies
Providing for the handling of exceptions and situations not specifically addressed in its system
processing integrity and related system security policies
Providing for the identification of and consistency with applicable laws and regulations, defined
commitments, service-level agreements and other contractual requirementsa.
i.
ii.
iii.
b.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
c.
d.
1.3 Responsibility and accountability for developing and maintaining entity’s system processing integrity and
related system security policies; changes, updates and exceptions to those policies are assigned.
2.0 Communications: The entity communicates its documented system processing integrity policies to
responsible parties and authorized users.
2.1 The entity has prepared an objective description of the system and its boundaries and communicated such
description to authorized users.
If the system is an e-commerce system, additional information provided on its website includes, but may not
be limited to, the following matters:
Descriptive information about the nature of the goods or services that will be provided, including,
where appropriate,
condition of goods (whether they are new, used or reconditioned).
description of services (or service contract).
sources of information (where it was obtained and how it was compiled).
The terms and conditions by which it conducts its e-commerce transactions including, but not
limited to, the following matters:
Time frame for completion of transactions (transaction means fulfillment of orders where
goods are being sold and delivery of service where a service is being provided)
Time frame and process for informing customers of exceptions to normal processing of orders
or service requests
Normal method of delivery of goods or services, including customer options, where
applicable
Payment terms, including customer options, if any
Electronic settlement practices and related charges to customers
How customers may cancel recurring charges, if any
Product return policies and limited liability , where applicable
Where customers can obtain warranty , repair service and support related to the goods and
services purchased on its website.
Procedures for resolution of issues regarding processing integrity . These may relate to any part of a
customer’s e-commerce transaction, including complaints related to the quality of services and
products, accuracy , completeness and the consequences for failure to resolve such complaints.
2.2 The processing integrity and related security obligations of users and the entity’s processing integrity and
related security commitments to users are communicated to authorized users.a.
b.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
2.3 Responsibility and accountability for the entity’s system processing integrity and related security policies,
and changes and updates to those policies, are communicated to entity personnel responsible for
implementing them.
2.4 The process for obtaining support and informing the entity about system-processing integrity issues, errors
and omissions, and breaches of systems security and for submitting complaints is communicated to
authorized users.
2.5 Changes that may affect system processing integrity and system security are communicated to management
and users who will be affected.
3.0 Pr ocedur es: The entity placed in oper ation pr ocedur es to achieve its docum ented system -
processing integrity objectives in accordance with its defined policies.
3.1 Procedures exist to (1) identify potential threats of disruptions to systems operations that would impair
processing-integrity commitments and (2) assess the risks associated with the identified threats.
3.2 The procedures related to completeness, accuracy , timeliness and authorization of inputs are consistent with
the documented system processing integrity policies.
If the system is an e-commerce system, the entity’s procedures include, but may not be limited to, the
following matters:
The entity checks each request or transaction for accuracy and completeness.
Positive acknowledgment is received from the customer before the transaction is processed.
3.3 The procedures related to completeness, accuracy , timeliness and authorization of system processing,
including error correction and database management, are consistent with documented system-processing
integrity policies.
If the system is an e-commerce system, the entity’s procedures include, but are not necessarily limited to,
the following matters:
The correct goods are shipped in the correct quantities in the time frame agreed upon, or services
and information are provided to the customer as requested.
Transaction exceptions are promptly communicated to the customer.
Incoming messages are processed and delivered accurately and completely to the correct IP
address.
Outgoing messages are processed and delivered accurately and completely to the service
provider’s (SP’s) Internet access point.
Messages remain intact while in transit within the confines of the SP’s network.
3.4 The procedures related to completeness, accuracy , timeliness and authorization of outputs are consistent
with the documented system-processing integrity policies.
If the system is an e-commerce system, the entity’s procedures include, but are not necessarily limited to,a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
the following matters:
The entity displays sales prices and all other costs and fees to the customer before processing the
transaction.
Transactions are billed and electronically settled as agreed.
Billing or settlement errors are promptly corrected.
3.5 There are procedures to enable tracing of information inputs from their source to their final disposition and
vice versa.
Security-related criteria relevant to the system’s processing integrity
3.6 Procedures exist to restrict logical access to the defined system including, but not limited to, the following
matters:
Logical-access security measures to access information not deemed to be public
Identification and authentication of authorized users
Registration and authorization of new users
The process to make changes and updates to user profiles
Distribution of output restricted to authorized users
Restriction of access to offline storage, backup data, systems and media
Restriction of access to system configurations, superuser functionality , master passwords, powerful
utilities and security devices (for example, firewalls)
3.7 Procedures exist to restrict physical access to the defined system including, but not limited to, facilities,
offline storage media, backup media and systems and other system components such as firewalls, routers
and servers.
3.8 Procedures exist to protect against unauthorized access to system resources.
3.9 Procedures exist to protect against infection by computer viruses, malicious code and unauthorized
software.
3.10 Encryption or other equivalent security techniques are used to protect user-authentication information and
the corresponding session transmitted over the Internet or other public networks.
Criteria related to execution and incident management used to achieve objectives
3.11 Procedures exist to identify , report and act upon system-processing integrity issues and related security
breaches and other incidents.
Cr iter ia r elated to the system  com ponents used to achieve the obj ectives
3.12 Procedures exist to classify data in accordance with classification policies and periodically monitor and
update such classifications as necessary.3.13 Procedures exist to provide that issues of noncompliance with system-processing integrity and related
security policies are promptly addressed and that corrective measures are taken on a timely basis.
3.14 Design, acquisition, implementation, configuration, modification and management of infrastructure and
software are consistent with defined processing integrity and related security policies.
3.15 Procedures exist to provide that personnel responsible for the design, development, implementation and
operation of systems affecting processing integrity and security have qualifications and resources to fulfill
their responsibilities.
Change-management-related criteria applicable to the system’s processing integrity
3.16 Procedures exist to maintain system components, including configurations consistent with the defined
system-processing integrity and related security policies.
3.17 Procedures exist to provide that only authorized, tested and documented changes are made to the system.
3.18 Procedures exist to provide that emergency changes are documented and authorized (including after-the-
fact approval).
Availability-related criteria applicable to the system’s processing integrity
3.19 Procedures exist to protect the system against potential risks (for example, environmental risks, natural
disasters and routine operational errors and omissions) that might impair system processing integrity .
3.20 Procedures exist to provide for restoration and disaster recovery consistent with the entity’s defined
processing integrity policies.
3.21 Procedures exist to provide for the completeness, accuracy and timeliness of backup data and systems.
4.0 Monitoring: The entity monitors the system and takes action to maintain compliance with the
defined system-processing integrity policies.
4.1 System-processing integrity and security performance are periodically reviewed and compared with the
defined system processing integrity and related security policies.
4.2 There is a process to identify and address potential impairments to the entity’s ongoing ability to achieve its
objectives in accordance with its defined system-processing integrity and related security policies.
4.3 Environmental, regulatory and technological changes are monitored, their impact on system-processing
integrity and security is assessed on a timely basis, and policies are updated for that assessment.
Confidentiality Principle and Criteria Table
Information designated as confidential is protected by the system as committed or agreed.
Criteria
1.0 Policies: The entity defines and documents its policies related to the system protecting
confidential information, as committed or agreed.a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
m.
n.
1.1 The entity’s system confidentiality and related security policies are established and periodically reviewed and
approved by a designated individual or group.
1.2 The entity’s policies related to the system’s protection of confidential information and security include, but
are not limited to, the following matters:
Identifying and documenting the confidentiality and related security requirements of authorized
users
Classifying data based on its criticality and sensitivity that is used to define protection requirements,
access rights and access restrictions, and retention and destruction requirements
Assessing risk on a periodic basis
Preventing unauthorized access
Adding new users, modifying the access levels of existing users, and removing users who no longer
need access
Assigning responsibility and accountability for confidentiality and related security
Assigning responsibility and accountability for system changes and maintenance
Testing, evaluating and authorizing system components before implementation
Addressing how complaints and requests relating to confidentiality and related security issues are
resolved
Handling confidentiality and related security breaches and other incidents
Providing for training and other resources to support its system confidentiality and related security
policies
Providing for the handling of exceptions and situations not specifically addressed in its system
confidentiality and related security policies
Providing for the identification of, and consistency with, applicable laws and regulations, defined
commitments, service-level agreements and other contractual requirements
Sharing information with third parties
1.3 Responsibility and accountability for developing and maintaining the entity’s system confidentiality and
related security policies, and changes and updates to those polices, are assigned.
2.0 Communications: The entity communicates its defined policies related to the system’s protection
of confidential information to responsible parties and authorized users.
2.1 The entity has prepared an objective description of the system and its boundaries and communicated such
description to authorized users.
2.2 The system confidentiality and related security obligations of users and the entity’s confidentiality and related
security commitments to users are communicated to authorized users before the confidential information isa.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
provided. This communication includes, but is not limited to, the following matters:
How information is designated as confidential and ceases to be confidential. The handling,
destruction, maintenance, storage, back-up and distribution or transmission of confidential information.
How access to confidential information is authorized and how such authorization is rescinded.
How confidential information is used.
How confidential information is shared.
If information is provided to third parties, disclosures include any limitations on reliance on the third
party’s confidentiality practices and controls. Lack of such disclosure indicates that the entity is relying
on the third party’s confidentiality practices and controls that meet or exceed those of the entity .
Practices to comply with applicable laws and regulations addressing confidentiality .
2.3 Responsibility and accountability for the entity’s system confidentiality and related security policies and
changes and updates to those policies are communicated to entity personnel responsible for implementing
them.
2.4 The process for informing the entity about breaches of confidentiality and system security and for submitting
complaints is communicated to authorized users.
2.5 Changes that may affect confidentiality and system security are communicated to management and users
who will be affected.
3.0 Pr ocedur es: The entity placed in oper ation pr ocedur es to achieve its docum ented system -
confidentiality objectives in accordance with its defined policies.
3.1 Procedures exist to (1) identify potential threats of disruptions to systems operations that would impair
system-confidentiality commitments and (2) assess the risks associated with the identified threats.
3.2 The system procedures related to confidentiality of inputs are consistent with the documented confidentiality
policies.
3.3 The system procedures related to confidentiality of data processing are consistent with the documented
confidentiality policies.
3.4 The system procedures related to confidentiality of outputs are consistent with the documented
confidentiality policies.
3.5 The system procedures provide that confidential information is disclosed to parties only in accordance with
the entity’s defined confidentiality and related security policies.
3.6 The entity has procedures to obtain assurance or representation that the confidentiality policies of third
parties to whom information is transferred and upon which the entity relies are in conformity with the entity’s
defined system confidentiality and related security policies and that the third party is in compliance with its
policies.
3.7 In the event that a disclosed confidentiality practice is discontinued or changed to be less restrictive, thea.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
entity has procedures to protect confidential information in accordance with the system confidentiality
practices in place when such information was received, or obtains customer consent to follow the new
confidentiality practice with respect to the customer’s confidential information.
System-security-related criteria relevant to confidentiality
3.8 Procedures exist to restrict logical access to the system and the confidential information resources
maintained in the system including, but not limited to, the following matters:
Logical-access security measures to restrict access to information resources not deemed to be
public.
Identification and authentication of all users.
Registration and authorization of new users.
The process to make changes and updates to user profiles.
Procedures to prevent customers, groups of individuals or other entities from accessing confidential
information other than their own.
Procedures to limit access to confidential information to only authorized employees based upon
their assigned roles and responsibilities.
Distribution of output containing confidential information restricted to authorized users.
Restriction of access to offline storage, backup data, systems and media.
Restriction of access to system configurations, superuser functionality , master passwords, powerful
utilities and security devices (for example, firewalls).
3.9 Procedures exist to restrict physical access to the defined system including, but not limited to, facilities,
backup media and other system components such as firewalls, routers and servers.
3.10 Procedures exist to protect against unauthorized access to system resources.
3.11 Procedures exist to protect against infection by computer viruses, malicious code and unauthorized
software.
3.12 Encryption or other equivalent security techniques are used to protect transmissions of user authentication
and other confidential information passed over the Internet or other public networks.
Criteria related to execution and incident management used to achieve the objectives
3.13 Procedures exist to identify , report, and act upon system confidentiality and security breaches and other
incidents.
Cr iter ia r elated to the system  com ponents used to achieve the obj ectives
3.14 Procedures exist to provide that system data are classified in accordance with the defined confidentiality and
related security policies.a.
3.15 Procedures exist to provide that issues of noncompliance with defined confidentiality and related security
policies are promptly addressed and that corrective measures are taken on a timely basis.
3.16 Design, acquisition, implementation, configuration, modification and management of infrastructure and
software are consistent with defined confidentiality and related security policies.
3.17 Procedures exist to help ensure that personnel responsible for the design, development, implementation and
operation of systems affecting confidentiality and security have the qualifications and resources to fulfill their
responsibilities.
Change-management-related criteria relevant to confidentiality
3.18 Procedures exist to maintain system components, including configurations consistent with the defined system
confidentiality and related security policies.
3.19 Procedures exist to provide that only authorized, tested, and documented changes are made to the system.
3.20 Procedures exist to provide that emergency changes are documented and authorized (including after-the-
fact approval).
3.21 Procedures exist to provide that confidential information is protected during the system development, testing
and change processes in accordance with defined system confidentiality and related security policies.
4.0 Monitoring: The entity monitors the system and takes action to maintain compliance with its
defined confidentiality policies.
4.1 The entity’s system confidentiality and security performance is periodically reviewed and compared with the
defined system confidentiality and related security policies.
4.2 There is a process to identify and address potential impairments to the entity’s ongoing ability to achieve its
objectives in accordance with its system confidentiality and related security policies.
4.3 Environmental, regulatory and technological changes are monitored, and their impact on system
confidentiality and security is assessed on a timely basis. System confidentiality policies and procedures are
updated for such changes as required.
Generally Accepted Privacy Principles and Criteria
Management Principle and Criteria
1.0 Management Principle: The entity defines, documents, communicates and assigns accountability
for its privacy policies and procedures.
1.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
1.1.0 The entity defines and documents its privacy policies with respect to the following:
Notice (See 2.1.0)b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
Choice and consent (See 3.1.0)
Collection (See 4.1.0)
Use, retention and disposal (See 5.1.0)
Access (See 6.1.0)
Disclosure to third parties (See 7.1.0)
Security for privacy (See 8.1.0)
Quality (See 9.1.0)
Monitoring and enforcement (See 10.1.0)
1.1.1 Communication to Internal Personnel
Privacy policies and the consequences of noncompliance with such policies are communicated, at least
annually , to the entity’s internal personnel responsible for collecting, using, retaining and disclosing personal
information. Changes in privacy policies are communicated to such personnel shortly after the changes are
approved.
1.1.2 Responsibility and Accountability for Policies
Responsibility and accountability are assigned to a person or group for developing, documenting,
implementing, enforcing, monitoring and updating the entity’s privacy policies. The names of such person or
group and their responsibilities are communicated to internal personnel.
1.2 Procedures and Controls
Review and Approval
1.2.1 Privacy policies and procedures, and changes thereto, are reviewed and approved by management.
Consistency of Privacy Policies and Procedures with Laws and Regulations
1.2.2 Policies and procedures are reviewed and compared to the requirements of applicable laws and regulations
at least annually and whenever changes to such laws and regulations are made. Privacy policies and
procedures are revised to conform to the requirements of applicable laws and regulations.
Personal Information Identification and Classification
1.2.3 The types of personal information and sensitive personal information and the related processes, systems and
third parties involved in the handling of such information are identified. Such information is covered by the
entity’s privacy and related security policies and procedures.
Risk Assessm ent
1.2.4 A risk assessment process is used to establish a risk baseline and to, at least annually , identify new or
changed risks to personal information and to develop and update responses to such risks.Consistency of Commitments with Privacy Policies and Procedures
1.2.5 Internal personnel or advisors review contracts for consistency with privacy policies and procedures and
address any inconsistencies.
Infrastructure and Systems Management
1.2.6 The potential privacy impact is assessed when new processes involving personal information are
implemented, and when changes are made to such processes (including any such activities outsourced to
third parties or contractors), and personal information continues to be protected in accordance with the
privacy policies. For this purpose, processes involving personal information include the design, acquisition,
development, implementation, configuration, modification and management of the following:
Infrastructure
Systems
Applications
Websites
Procedures
Products and services
Data bases and information repositories
Mobile computing and other similar electronic devices
The use of personal information in process and system test and development is prohibited unless such
information is anonymized or otherwise protected in accordance with the entity’s privacy policies and
procedures.
Privacy Incident and Breach Management
1.2.7 A documented privacy incident and breach management program has been implemented that includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
Procedures for the identification, management and resolution of privacy incidents and breaches
Defined responsibilities
A process to identify incident severity and determine required actions and escalation procedures
A process for complying with breach laws and regulations, including stakeholders’ breach notification, if
required
An accountability process for employees or third parties responsible for incidents or breaches with
remediation, penalties or discipline as appropriate
A process for periodic review (at least on an annual basis) of actual incidents to identify necessary
program updates based on the following:
Incident patterns and root cause
Changes in the internal control environment or external requirements (regulation or legislation)
a.
Periodic testing or walkthrough process (at least, on an annual basis) and associated program
remediation as needed
Supporting Resources
1.2.8 Resources are provided by the entity to implement and support its privacy policies.
Qualifications of Internal Personnel
1.2.9 The entity establishes qualifications for personnel responsible for protecting the privacy and security of
personal information and assigns such responsibilities only to those personnel who meet these qualifications
and have received needed training.
Privacy Awareness and Training
1.2.10 A privacy awareness program about the entity’s privacy policies and related matters, and specific training
for selected personnel (depending on their roles and responsibilities), are provided.
Changes in Regulatory and Business Requirements
1.2.11 For each jurisdiction in which the entity operates, the effect on privacy requirements from changes in the
following factors is identified and addressed:
Legal and regulatory
Contracts, including service-level agreements
Industry requirements
Business operations and processes
People, roles and responsibilities
Technology
Privacy policies and procedures are updated to reflect changes in requirements.
Notice
Notice Principle and Criteria
2.0 Notice Principle: The entity provides notice about its privacy policies and procedures and
identifies the purposes for which personal information is collected, used, retained, and disclosed.
2.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
2.1.0 The entity’s privacy policies address providing notice to individuals.
Communication to Individuals
2.1.1 Notice is provided to individuals regarding the following privacy policies:
Purpose for collecting personal informationb.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
Choice and consent (See 3.1.1)
Collection (See 4.1.1)
Use, retention, and disposal (See 5.1.1)
Access (See 6.1.1)
Disclosure to third parties (See 7.1.1)
Security for privacy (See 8.1.1)
Quality (See 9.1.1)
Monitoring and enforcement (See 10.1.1)
If personal information is collected from sources other than the individual, such sources are described in the
notice.
2.2 Procedures and Controls
Provision of Notice
2.2.1 Notice is provided to the individual about the entity’s privacy policies and procedures (a) at or before the
time personal information is collected or as soon as practical thereafter, (b) at or before the entity changes
its privacy policies and procedures or as soon as practical thereafter or (c) before personal information is
used for new purposes not previously identified.
Entities and Activities Covered
2.2.2 An objective description of the entities and activities covered by the privacy policies and procedures is
included in the entity’s privacy notice.
Clear and Conspicuous
2.2.3 The entity’s privacy notice is conspicuous and uses clear language.
Choice and Consent
Choice and Consent Principle and Criteria
3.0 Choice and Consent Principle: The entity describes the choices available to the individual and
obtains implicit or explicit consent with respect to the collection, use and disclosure of personal
information.
3.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
3.1.0 The entity’s privacy policies address the choices available to individuals and the consent to be obtained.Communication to Individuals
3.1.1 Individuals are informed about (a) the choices available to them with respect to the collection, use and
disclosure of personal information and (b) that implicit or explicit consent is required to collect, use and
disclose personal information, unless a law or regulation specifically requires or allows otherwise.
Consequences of Denying or Withdrawing Consent
3.1.2 When personal information is collected, individuals are informed of the consequences of refusing to provide
personal information or of denying or withdrawing consent to use personal information for purposes
identified in the notice.
3.2 Procedures and Controls
Implicit or Explicit Consent
3.2.1 Implicit or explicit consent is obtained from the individual at or before the time personal information is
collected or soon thereafter. The individual’s preferences expressed in his or her consent are confirmed and
implemented.
Consent for  New  Pur poses and Uses
3.2.2 If information that was previously collected is to be used for purposes not previously identified in the privacy
notice, the new purpose is documented, the individual is notified and implicit or explicit consent is obtained
prior to such new use or purpose.
Explicit Consent for Sensitive Information
3.2.3 Explicit consent is obtained directly from the individual when sensitive personal information is collected, use
d
or disclosed, unless a law or regulation specifically requires otherwise.
Consent for Online Data Transfers To or From an Individual’s Computer or Other Similar
Electronic Devices
3.2.4 Consent is obtained before personal information is transferred to or from an individual’s computer or other
similar device.
Collection
Collection Principle and Criteria
4.0 Collection Principle: The entity collects personal information only for the purposes identified in
the notice.
4.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
4.1.0 The entity’s privacy policies address the collection of personal information.
Communication to Individuals4.1.1 Individuals are informed that personal information is collected only for the purposes identified in the notice.
Types of Personal Information Collected and Methods of Collection
4.1.2 The types of personal information collected and the methods of collection, including the use of cookies or
other tracking techniques, are documented and described in the privacy notice.
4.2 Procedures and Controls
Collection Limited to Identified Purpose
4.2.1 The collection of personal information is limited to that necessary for the purposes identified in the notice.
Collection by Fair and Lawful Means
4.2.2 Methods of collecting personal information are reviewed by management before they are implemented to
confirm that personal information is obtained (a) fairly (that is, without intimidation or deception) and (b)
lawfully (that is, adhering to all relevant rules of law, whether derived from statute or common law, relating
to the collection of personal information).
Collection from Third Parties
4.2.3 Management confirms that third parties from whom personal information is collected (that is, sources other
than the individual) are reliable sources that collect information fairly and lawfully.
Information Developed about Individuals
4.2.4 Individuals are informed if the entity develops or acquires additional information about them for its use.
Use, Retention, and Disposal
Use, Retention, and Disposal Principle and Criteria
5.0 Use, Retention, and Disposal Principle: The entity limits the use of personal information to the
purposes identified in the notice and for which the individual has provided implicit or explicit
consent. The entity retains personal information for only as long as necessary to fulfill the stated
purposes or as required by law or regulations and thereafter appropriately disposes of such
information.
5.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
5.1.0 The entity’s privacy policies address the use, retention and disposal of personal information.
Communication to Individuals
5.1.1 Individuals are informed that personal information is (a) used only for the purposes identified in the notice
and only if the individual has provided implicit or explicit consent, unless a law or regulation specifically
requires otherwise, (b) retained for no longer than necessary to fulfill the stated purposes, or for a periodspecifically required by law or regulation and (c) disposed of in a manner that prevents loss, theft, misuse or
unauthorized access.
5.2 Procedures and Controls
Use of Personal Information
5.2.1 Personal information is used only for the purposes identified in the notice and only if the individual has
provided implicit or explicit consent, unless a law or regulation specifically requires otherwise.
Retention of Personal Information
5.2.2 Personal information is retained for no longer than necessary to fulfill the stated purposes unless a law or
regulation specifically requires otherwise.
Disposal, Destruction and Redaction of Personal Information
5.2.3 Personal information no longer retained is anonymized, disposed of or destroyed in a manner that prevents
loss, theft, misuse or unauthorized access.
Access
Access Principle and Criteria
6.0 Access Principle: The entity provides individuals with access to their personal information for
review and update.
6.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
6.1.0 The entity’s privacy policies address providing individuals with access to their personal information.
Communication to Individuals
6.1.1 Individuals are informed about how they may obtain access to their personal information to review, update
and correct that information.
6.2 Procedures and Controls
Access by Individuals to Their Personal Information
6.2.1 Individuals are able to determine whether the entity maintains personal information about them and, upon
request, may obtain access to their personal information.
Confirmation of an Individual’s Identity
6.2.2 The identity of individuals who request access to their personal information is authenticated before they are
given access to that information.
Understandable Personal Information, Time Frame, and Cost6.2.3 Personal information is provided to the individual in an understandable form, in a reasonable timeframe and
at a reasonable cost, if any .
Denial of Access
6.2.4 Individuals are informed, in writing, of the reason a request for access to their personal information was
denied, the source of the entity’s legal right to deny such access, if applicable, and the individual’s right, if
any , to challenge such denial, as specifically permitted or required by law or regulation.
Updating or Correcting Personal Information
6.2.5 Individuals are able to update or correct personal information held by the entity . If practical and
economically feasible to do so, the entity provides such updated or corrected information to third parties
that previously were provided with the individual’s personal information.
Statem ent of Disagr eem ent
6.2.6 Individuals are informed in writing about the reason a request for correction of personal information was
denied, and how they may appeal.
Disclosure to Third Parties
Disclosure to Third Parties Principle and Criteria
7.0 Disclosure to Third Parties Principle: The entity discloses personal information to third parties
only for the purposes identified in the notice and with the implicit or explicit consent of the
individual.
7.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
7.1.0 The entity’s privacy policies address the disclosure of personal information to third parties.
Communication to Individuals
7.1.1 Individuals are informed that personal information is disclosed to third parties only for the purposes
identified in the notice and for which the individual has provided implicit or explicit consent unless a law or
regulation specifically allows or requires otherwise.
Communication to Third Parties
7.1.2 Privacy policies or other specific instructions or requirements for handling personal information are
communicated to third parties to whom personal information is disclosed.
7.2 Procedures and Controls
Disclosure of Personal Information
7.2.1 Personal information is disclosed to third parties only for the purposes described in the notice, and for whicha.
b.
the individual has provided implicit or explicit consent, unless a law or regulation specifically requires or
allows otherwise.
Protection of Personal Information
7.2.2 Personal information is disclosed only to third parties who have agreements with the entity to protect
personal information in a manner consistent with the relevant aspects of the entity’s privacy policies or other
specific instructions or requirements. The entity has procedures in place to evaluate whether the third parties
have effective controls to meet the terms of the agreement, instructions or requirements.
New Purposes and Uses
7.2.3 Personal information is disclosed to third parties for new purposes or uses only with the prior implicit or
explicit consent of the individual.
Misuse of Personal Information by a Third Party
7.2.4 The entity takes remedial action in response to misuse of personal information by a third party to whom the
entity has transferred such information.
Security for Privacy
Security for Privacy Principle and Criteria
8.0 Security for Privacy Principle: The entity protects personal information against unauthorized
access (both physical and logical).
8.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
8.1.0 The entity’s privacy policies (including any relevant security policies), address the security of personal
information.
Communication to Individuals
8.1.1 Individuals are informed that precautions are taken to protect personal information.
8.2 Procedures and Controls
Information Security Program
8.2.1 A security program has been developed, documented, approved and implemented that includes
administrative, technical and physical safeguards to protect personal information from loss, misuse,
unauthorized access, disclosure, alteration or destruction. The security program should address, but not be
limited to, the following areas
1 insofar as they relate to the security of personal information:
Risk assessment and treatment [1.2.4]
Security policy [8.1.0]c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
k.
l.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
Organization of information security [sections 1, 7, and 10]
Asset management [section 1]
Human resources security [section 1]
Physical and environmental security [8.2.3 and 8.2.4]
Communications and operations management [sections 1, 7, and 10]
Access control [sections 1, 8.2, and 10]
Information systems acquisition, development, and maintenance [1.2.6]
Information security incident management [1.2.7]
Business continuity management [section 8.2]
Compliance [sections 1 and 10]
8.2.2 Logical-Access Controls
Logical access to personal information is restricted by procedures that address the following matters:
Authorizing and registering internal personnel and individuals
Identifying and authenticating internal personnel and individuals
Making changes and updating access profiles
Granting privileges and permissions for access to IT infrastructure components and personal
information
Preventing individuals from accessing anything other than their own personal or sensitive
information
Limiting access to personal information to only authorized internal personnel based upon their
assigned roles and responsibilities
Distributing output only to authorized internal personnel
Restricting logical access to offline storage, backup data, systems and media
Restricting access to system configurations, superuser functionality , master passwords, powerful
utilities and security devices (for example, firewalls)
Preventing the introduction of viruses, malicious code and unauthorized software
Physical Access Controls
8.2.3 Physical access is restricted to personal information in any form (including the components of the entity’s
system(s) that contain or protect personal information).Environmental Safeguards
8.2.4 Personal information, in all forms, is protected against accidental disclosure due to natural disasters and
environmental hazards.
Transmitted Personal Information
8.2.5 Personal information is protected when transmitted by mail or other physical means. Personal information
collected and transmitted over the Internet, over public and other unsecured networks and wireless
networks is protected by deploying industry standard encryption technology for transferring and receiving
personal information.
Personal Information on Portable Media
8.2.6 Personal information stored on portable media or devices is protected from unauthorized access.
Testing Security Safeguards
8.2.7 Tests of the effectiveness of the key administrative, technical, and physical safeguards protecting personal
information are conducted at least annually.
Quality
Quality Principle and Criteria
9.0 Quality Principle: The entity maintains accurate, complete and relevant personal information for
the pur poses identified in the notice.
9.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
9.1.0 The entity’s privacy policies address the quality of personal information.
Communication to Individuals
9.1.1 Individuals are informed that they are responsible for providing the entity with accurate and complete
personal information, and for contacting the entity if correction of such information is required.
9.2 Procedures and Controls
Accuracy and Completeness of Personal Information
9.2.1 Personal information is accurate and complete for the purposes for which it is to be used.
Relevance of Personal Information
9.2.2 Personal information is relevant to the purposes for which it is to be used.
Monitoring and Enforcement1
Monitoring and Enforcement Principle and Criteria
10.0 Monitoring and Enforcement Principle: The entity monitors compliance with its privacy policies
and procedures and has procedures to address privacy-related inquiries, complaints and disputes.
10.1 Policies and Communications
Privacy Policies
10.1.0 The entity’s privacy policies address the monitoring and enforcement of privacy policies and procedures.
Communication to Individuals
10.1.1 Individuals are informed about how to contact the entity with inquiries, complaints and disputes.
10.2 Procedures and Controls
Inquiry, Complaint and Dispute Process
10.2.1 A process is in place to address inquiries, complaints and disputes.
Dispute Resolution and Recourse
10.2.2 Each complaint is addressed and the resolution is documented and communicated to the individual.
Com pliance Review
10.2.3 Compliance with privacy policies and procedures, commitments and applicable laws, regulations, service-
level agreements and other contracts is reviewed and documented, and the results of such reviews are
reported to management. If problems are identified, remediation plans are developed and implemented.
Instances of Noncompliance
10.2.4 Instances of noncompliance with privacy policies and procedures are documented and reported and, if
needed, corrective and disciplinary measures are taken on a timely basis.
Ongoing Monitoring
10.2.5 Ongoing procedures are performed for monitoring the effectiveness of controls over personal information,
based on a risk assessment [1.2.4], and for taking timely corrective actions where necessary .
These areas are drawn from ISO/IEC 27002:2005, Information technology – Security techniques – Code of practice for information security
management. Permission is granted by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) on behalf of the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO). Copies of ISO/IEC 27002 can be purchased from ANSI in the United States at http://webstore.ansi.org and in Canada
from the Standards Council of Canada at www .standardsstore.ca/eSpecs/index.jsp. It is not necessary to meet all of the criteria of ISO/IEC
27002:2005 to satisfy Generally Accepted Privacy Principles’ criterion 8.2.1. The references associated with each area indicate the most relevant
Generally Accepted Privacy Principles’ criteria for this purpose.Appendix C
Illustrative Management Assertions and Related Service
Auditor’s Reports on Controls at a Service Organization
Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity,
Confidentiality, and Privacy
This appendix presents two examples of management’s assertion, each followed by the related service auditor’s
report. The following table summarizes how these examples differ:
Example 1 Example 2
Principles covered by management’s
assertion and the service auditor’s
report
Security , availability , processing
integrity and confidentiality.
Privacy .
Need for complementary user-entity
controls at the user entities
Complementary user-entity controls
are needed to meet certain
applicable trust services criteria.
Modifications to the report are
shown in boldface italics.
Complementary user-entity controls
are not needed to meet certain
applicable trust services criteria.
Placement of the description criteria
in management’s assertion
The description criteria are
presented immediately after
management’s assertion about the
fairness of the presentation of the
description of the service
organization’s system.
The description criteria are presented
after all of management’s assertions.
Example 1: Illustrative Management Assertion on Controls at a
Service Organization Relevant to the Security, Availability,
Processing Integrity and Confidentiality Principles
Management of XYZ Service Organization’s Assertion Regarding Its Accurate Claims Processing
System for the Period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X11.
a.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.
We have prepared the attached description titled “Description of XYZ Service Organization’s Accurate Claims
Processing System for the Period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1” (the description), based on the
criteria in items (a)(i)–(ii) below, which are the criteria for a description of a service organization’s system in
paragraphs 1.33–.34 of the CPA Canada Guide Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization Relevant
to Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality or Privacy (the description criteria). The
description is intended to provide users with information about the Accurate Claims Processing System,
particularly system controls intended to meet the criteria for the security , availability , processing integrity and
confidentiality principles set forth in Trust Services Principles and Criteria for Security, Availability,
Processing Integrity, Confidentiality and Privacy (applicable trust services criteria). We confirm, to the best
of our knowledge and belief, that
the description fairly presents the [type or name of] system throughout the period [date] to [date],
based on the following description criteria:
The description contains the following information:
The types of services provided
The components of the system used to provide the services, which are the following:
Infrastructure. The physical and hardware components of a system (facilities, equipment
and networks).
Software. The programs and operating software of a system (systems, applications and
utilities).
People. The personnel involved in the operation and use of a system (developers, operators,
users and managers).
Procedures. The automated and manual procedures involved in the operation of a system.
Data. The information used and supported by a system (transaction streams, files, databases
and tables).
The boundaries or aspects of the system covered by the description
How the system captures and addresses significant events and conditions
The process used to prepare and deliver reports and other information to user entities and
other parties
If information is provided to, or received from, subservice organizations or other parties,
how such information is provided or received; the role of the subservice organization and other
parties; and the procedures performed to determine that such information and its processing,
maintenance and storage are subject to appropriate controls
For each principle being reported on, the applicable trust services criteria and the related
controls designed to meet those criteria, including, as applicable, complementary user-entity
controls contemplated in the design of the service organization’s system
For subservice organizations presented using the carve-out method, the nature of the
services provided by the subservice organization; each of the applicable trust services criteria
that are intended to be met by controls at the subservice organization, alone or in combination
with controls at the service organization, and the types of controls expected to be implementedix.
x.
xi.
b.
2.
3.
at carved-out subservice organizations to meet those criteria and, for privacy , the types of
activities that the subservice organization would need to perform to comply with our privacy
commitments
Any applicable trust services criteria that are not addressed by a control at the service
organization or a subservice organization and the reasons therefore
Other aspects of the service organization’s control environment, risk assessment process,
information and communication systems and monitoring of controls that are relevant to the
services provided and the applicable trust services criteria
Relevant details of changes to the service organization’s system during the period covered
by the description
The description does not omit or distort information relevant to the service organization’s system
while acknowledging that the description is prepared to meet the common needs of a broad range of
users and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the system that each individual user may
consider important to his or her own particular needs.
the controls stated in description were suitably designed throughout the specified period to meet the
applicable trust services criteria.
the controls stated in the description operated effectively throughout the specified period to meet the
applicable trust services criteria.
Example 1: Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report on Controls at a
Service Organization Relevant to Security, Availability, Processing
Integrity and Confidentiality
(Language shown in boldface italics represents modifications that would be made to the service auditor’s report
if complementary user-entity controls are needed to meet certain applicable trust services criteria.)
Type 2 Independent Service Auditor’s Report
To: XYZ Service Organization
Scope
We have audited the attached description titled “Description of XYZ Service Organization’s Accurate Claims
Processing System for the Period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1”
1 (the description) and the
suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls to meet the criteria for the security , availability ,
processing integrity and confidentiality principles set forth in Trust Services Principles and Criteria for
Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality and Privacy  (applicable trust services criteria),
throughout the period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1. The description indicates that certain
applicable trust services criteria specified in the description can be achieved only if complementaryuser-entity controls contemplated in the design of XYZ Service Organization’s controls are suitably
designed and operating effectively, along with related controls at the service organization. We have
not evaluated the suitability of the design or operating effectiveness of such complementary user-
entity controls.
Service organization’ s responsibilities
XYZ Service Organization has provided the attached assertion titled “Management of XYZ Service
Organization’s Assertion Regarding Its Accurate Claims Processing System for the Period January 1, 20X1, to
December 31, 20X1,”
2 which is based on the criteria identified in management’s assertion. XYZ Service
Organization is responsible for (1) preparing the description and assertion (2) the completeness, accuracy , and
method of presentation of both the description and assertion (3) providing the services covered by the
description (4) specifying the controls that meet the applicable trust services criteria and stating them in the
description and (5) designing, implementing and documenting the controls to meet the applicable trust services
criteria.
Service auditor’ s responsibilities
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the fairness of the presentation of the description based on the
description criteria set forth in XYZ Service Organization’s assertion and on the suitability of the design and
operating effectiveness of the controls to achieve the applicable trust services criteria, based on our audit. We
conducted our audit in accordance with CPA Canada Handbook – Assurance Section 5025, Standards for
Assurance Engagements Other than Audits of Financial Statements and Other Historical Financial
Information. Those standards require that we plan and perform our audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether, in all material respects, (1) the description is fairly presented based on the description criteria and (2)
the controls were suitably designed and operating effectively to achieve the applicable trust services criteria
throughout the period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1.
Our audit involved performing procedures to obtain evidence about the fairness of the presentation of the
description based on the description criteria and the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of those
controls to meet the applicable trust services criteria. Our procedures included assessing the risks that the
description is not fairly presented and that the controls were not suitably designed or operating effectively to
meet the applicable trust services criteria. Our procedures also included testing the operating effectiveness of
those controls that we consider necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services
criteria were met. Our audit also included evaluating the overall presentation of the description. We believe that
the evidence we obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Inherent limitations
Because of their nature, controls at a service organization may not always operate effectively to meet the
applicable trust services criteria. Also, the projection to the future of any evaluation of the fairness of the
presentation of the description or conclusions about the suitability of the design or operating effectiveness of the1.
2.
3.
controls to meet the applicable trust services criteria is subject to the risks that the system may change or that
controls at a service organization may become inadequate or fail.
Opinion
In our opinion, in all material respects, based on the criteria described in XYZ Service Organization’s assertion
and the applicable trust services criteria
the description fairly presents the system that was designed and implemented throughout the period
January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1.
the controls stated in the description were suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance that the
applicable trust services criteria would be achieved if the controls operated effectively throughout the
period January 1, 20X1 to December 31, 20X1, and user entities applied the complementary user-
entity controls contemplated in the design of XYZ Service Organization’s controls throughout
the period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1.
the controls tested, which together with the complementary user-entity controls referred to in
the scope paragraph of this report, if operating effectively, were those necessary to provide
reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services criteria were achieved, operated effectively
throughout the period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1.
Description of tests of controls
The specific controls we tested and the nature, timing, and results of our tests are presented in the section of our
report titled “Description of Test of Controls and Results Thereof.”
Restricted use
This report and the description of tests of controls and results thereof are intended solely for the information and
use of XYZ Service Organization; user entities of XYZ Service Organization’s Accurate Claims Processing
System during some or all of the period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1; and prospective user
entities, independent auditors and practitioners providing services to such user entities and regulators who have
sufficient knowledge and understanding of the following:
The nature of the service provided by the service organization
How the service organization’s system interacts with user entities, subservice organizations and other parties
Internal control and its limitations
Complementary user-entity controls and how they interact with related controls at the service organization to
meet the applicable trust services criteria
The applicable trust services criteria
The risks that may threaten the achievement of the applicable trust services criteria and how controls address
those risks
This report is not intended to be and should not be used by anyone other than these specified parties.1.
a.
b.
i.
[Service auditor’ s signature]
[Date of the service auditor’ s report]
[Service auditor’ s address]
Example 2: Illustrative Management Assertion Regarding a
Description of a Service Organization’s System, the Suitability of the
Design and Operating Effectiveness of Its Controls Relevant to the
Privacy Principle and Its Compliance with Commitments in Its
Statement of Privacy Practices
Management of XYZ Service Organization’s Assertion
We have prepared the attached description titled [title of the description]3 (the description) of XYZ Service
Organization’s [type or name of] system and our statement of privacy practices4 related to XYZ Service
Organization’s [type or name of] service. The description is intended to provide users with information about
our system, particularly system controls intended to meet the criteria for the privacy principle set forth in Trust
Services Principles and Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality and
Privacy (applicable trust services criteria). We confirm, to the best of our knowledge and belief, that
the description fairly presents the [type or name of] system throughout the period [date] to [date]. The
criteria for the description are identified below under the heading “Description Criteria.”
the controls stated in the description were suitably designed and operated effectively throughout the period
[date] to [date] to meet the criteria for the privacy principle set forth in Trust Services Principles and Criteria
(the applicable trust services criteria).
we complied with the commitments in our statement of privacy practices, in all material respects, throughout
the period [date] to [date].
Description Criteria
In preparing our description and making our assertion regarding the fairness of the presentation of the
description, we used the criteria in items (a)–(b) below, which are the criteria in paragraphs 1.33–.34 of the
CPA Canada Guide Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to Security, Availability,
Processing Integrity, Confidentiality or Privacy:
The description contains the following information:
The types of services provided.
The components of the system used to provide the services, which are the following:
Infrastructure. The physical and hardware components of a system (facilities, equipmentii.
iii.
iv.
v.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
and networks).
Software. The programs and operating software of a system (systems, applications and
utilities).
People. The personnel involved in the operation and use of a system (developers,
operators, users and managers).
Procedures. The automated and manual procedures involved in the operation of a system.
Data. The information used and supported by a system (transaction streams, files,
databases and tables).
The boundaries or aspects of the system covered by the description and the service auditor’s
report. As it relates to the privacy of information, a system includes, at a minimum, all system
components directly or indirectly related to the collection, use, retention, disclosure, and disposal or
anonymization of personal information throughout its personal information life cycle.
The types of personal information collected from individuals or obtained from user entities or
other parties and how such information is collected and, if collected by user entities, how it is
obtained by the service organization.
The process for (1) identifying specific requirements in agreements with user entities and laws
and regulations applicable to personal information and (2) implementing controls and practices to
meet those requirements.
If the service organization provides the privacy notice to individuals about whom personal
information is collected, used, retained, disclosed, and disposed of or anonymized, the privacy notice
prepared in conformity with the relevant criteria for a privacy notice set forth in Trust Services
Principles and Criteria.
If the user entities, rather than the service organization, are responsible for providing the privacy
notice to individuals, a statement regarding how the privacy notice is communicated to individuals,
that the user entities are responsible for communicating such notice to the individuals and that the
service organization is responsible for communicating its privacy practices to the user entities in its
statement of privacy practices, which includes the following information:
A summary of the significant privacy and related security requirements common to most
agreements between the service organization and its user entities and any requirements in a user-
entity agreement that the service organization meets for all or most user entities
A summary of the significant privacy and related security requirements mandated by law,
regulation, an industry or a market that the service organization meets for all or most user entities
that are not included in user-entity agreements
The purposes, uses and disclosures of personal information as permitted by user-entity
agreements, and beyond those permitted by such agreements but not prohibited by such
agreements, and the service organization’s commitments regarding the purpose, use and
disclosure of personal information that are prohibited by such agreements
A statement that the information will be retained for a period no longer than necessary to
fulfill the stated purposes or contractual requirements or for the period required by law or
regulation, as applicable, or a statement describing other retention practicesv.
vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.
x.
h.
i.
j.
k.
i.
ii.
l.
m.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
n.
A statement that the information will be disposed of in a manner that prevents loss, theft,
misuse, or unauthorized access to the information
If applicable, how the service organization supports any process permitted by user entities
for individuals to obtain access to their information to review, update, or correct it
If applicable, a description of the process to determine that personal information is
accurate and complete and how the service organization implements correction processes
permitted by user entities
If applicable, how inquiries, complaints and disputes from individuals (whether directly
from the individual or indirectly through user entities) regarding their personal information are
handled by the service organization
A statement regarding the existence of a written security program and what industry or
other standards it is based on
Other relevant information related to privacy practices deemed appropriate for user
entities by the service organization
If the user entities, rather than the service organization, are responsible for providing the privacy
notice to individuals, the service organization’s statement of privacy practices.
How the system captures and addresses significant events and conditions.
The process used to deliver services, reports and other information to user entities and other
parties.
If information is provided to, or received from, subservice organizations or third parties
how such information is provided or received and the role of the subservice organizations
or other parties.
the procedures performed to determine that such information is protected in conformity
with the service organization’s statement of privacy practices.
For each principle being reported on, the applicable trust services criteria and the related
controls designed to meet those criteria, including, as applicable, complementary user-entity controls
contemplated in the design of the service organization’s system.
For subservice organizations presented using the carve-out method
the nature of the services provided by the subservice organization.
if the description addresses the privacy principle, any aspects of the personal information
life cycle for which responsibility has been delegated to the subservice organization, if
applicable.
each of the applicable trust services criteria that are intended to be met by controls at the
subservice organization, alone or in combination with controls at the service organization, and
the types of controls expected to be implemented at carved-out subservice organizations to
meet those criteria.
if the description addresses the privacy principle, the types of activities that the subservice
organization would need to perform to comply with the service organization’s privacy
commitments.
Any applicable trust services criteria that are not addressed by a control at the serviceo.
p.
2.
organization or subservice organization and the reasons therefore.
Other aspects of the service organization’s control environment, risk assessment process,
information and communication systems, and monitoring of controls that are relevant to the services
provided, the personal information life cycle and the applicable trust services criteria.
Relevant details of changes to the service organization’s system during the period covered by
the description.
The description does not omit or distort information relevant to the service organization’s system and
personal information life cycle while acknowledging that the description is presented to meet the common
needs of a broad range of users and may not, therefore, include every aspect of the system and personal
information life cycle that each individual user may consider important to his or her own particular needs.
Example 2: Illustrative Service Auditor’s Report on a Description of a
Service Organization’s System, the Suitability of the Design and
Operating Effectiveness of Its Controls Relevant to the Privacy
Principle, and Its Compliance with Commitments in Its Statement of
Privacy Practices
Independent Service Auditor’s Report
To: XYZ Service Organization
Scope
We have audited (1) the accompanying description titled [title of the description];
5 (2) the suitability of the
design and operating effectiveness of controls to meet the criteria for the privacy principle set forth in Trust
Services Principles and Criteria for Security, Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality and
Privacy (applicable trust services criteria); and (3) XYZ Service Organization’s compliance with the
commitments in its statement of privacy practices throughout the period January 1, 20X1, to December 31,
20X1.
Service organization’ s responsibilities
XYZ Service Organization has provided the accompanying assertion titled [title of assertion].
6 XYZ Service
Organization is responsible for (1) preparing the description and assertion; (2) the completeness, accuracy , and
method of presentation of both the description and assertion; (3) providing the services covered by the
description; (4) specifying the controls that meet the applicable trust services criteria and stating them in the
description; (5) designing, implementing, maintaining, and documenting controls to meet the applicable trust
services criteria and (6) complying with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices that is included in
the description.1.
Service auditor’ s responsibilities
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on (1) the fairness of the presentation of the description based on the
description criteria identified in management’s assertion; (2) the suitability of the design and operating
effectiveness of the controls to achieve the applicable trust services criteria; and (3) XYZ Service Organization’s
compliance with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices, based on our audit. We conducted our
audit in accordance with CPA Canada Handbook – Assurance Section 5025, Standards for Assurance
Engagements Other than Audits of Financial Statements and Other Historical Financial Information.
Those standards require that we plan and perform our audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether, in all
material respects, (1) the description is fairly presented based on the description criteria (2) the controls were
suitably designed and operating effectively to achieve the applicable trust services criteria throughout the period
[date] to [date] and (3) XYZ Service Organization complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy
practices throughout the period [date] to [date].
Our audit involved performing procedures to obtain evidence about the fairness of the presentation of the
description based on the description criteria, the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of the
controls to meet the applicable trust services criteria and XYZ Service Organization’s compliance with the
commitments in its statement of privacy practices. Our procedures included assessing the risks that the
description is not fairly presented, that the controls were not suitably designed or operating effectively to meet
the applicable trust services criteria and that XYZ Service Organization did not comply with the commitments in
its statement of privacy practices. Our procedures also included testing the operating effectiveness of those
controls that we consider necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable trust services criteria
were met and testing XYZ Service Organization’s compliance with the commitments in its statement of privacy
practices. Our audit also included evaluating the overall presentation of the description. We believe that the
evidence we obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Inherent limitations
Because of their nature, controls at a service organization may not always protect personal information against
unauthorized access or use nor do they ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. For example,
fraud or unauthorized access to personal information or unauthorized use or disclosure of personal information
by persons authorized to access it may not be prevented or detected, or service organization personnel may not
always comply with the commitments in the statement of privacy practices. Also, the projection of any
conclusions, based on our findings, to future periods is subject to the risk that any changes or future events may
alter the validity of such conclusions.
Opinion
In our opinion, in all material respects, based on the criteria described in XYZ Service Organization’s assertion
and the applicable trust services criteria
the description fairly presents XYZ Service Organization’s [type or name of] system and related
privacy practices that were designed and implemented throughout the period [date] to [date].2.
3.
4.
1
2
3
the controls stated in the description were suitably designed to provide reasonable assurance that the
applicable trust services criteria would be achieved if the controls operated effectively throughout the
period [date] to [date].
the controls tested, which were those necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the applicable
trust services criteria were achieved, operated effectively throughout the period [date] to [date].
XYZ Service Organization complied with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices
throughout the period [date] to [date].
Description of tests of controls
The specific controls and privacy commitments tested and the nature, timing, and results of those tests are listed
on pages [yy–zz].
Restricted use
This report and the description of tests of controls, tests of privacy commitments, and results thereof in section
X of this report are intended solely for the information and use of XYZ Service Organization; user entities of
XYZ Service Organization’s [type or name of] system during some or all of the period [date] to [date]; and
those prospective user entities, independent auditors and practitioners providing services to such user entities
and regulators who have sufficient knowledge and understanding of the following:
The nature of the service provided by the service organization
How the service organization’s system interacts with user entities, subservice organizations and other parties
Internal control and its limitations
Complementary user-entity controls and how they interact with related controls at the service organization to
meet the applicable trust services criteria
The applicable trust services criteria
The risks that may threaten the achievement of the applicable trust services criteria and how controls address
those risks
This report is not intended to be and should not be used by anyone other than these specified parties.
[Service auditor’ s signature]
[Date of the service auditor’ s report]
[Service auditor’s address]
The title of the description of the service organization’s system in the service auditor’s report should be the same as the title used by
management of the service organization in its description of the service organization’s system.
The title of the assertion in the service auditor’s report should be the same as the title used by management of the service organization in its
assertion.
Insert the title of the description of the service organization’s system used by management of the service organization in its description (for
example, “Description of XYZ Service Organization’s Claims-Processing System Throughout the Period January 1, 20X1, to December 31,
20X1, Including its Statement of Privacy Practices”).4
5
6
In many cases, the user entities provide a privacy notice to the individuals about whom information is collected. In such cases, the service
organization would prepare a statement of privacy practices for use by the user entities to describe its practices and commitme nts to user entities
related to the matters typically included in a privacy notice to individuals. If the service organization is responsible for providing the privacy
notice directly to individuals, such notice may be a suitable substitute for a statement of privacy practices.
Insert the title of the description used by management of the service organization (for example, “Description of XYZ Service Organization’s
Claims Processing System Throughout the Period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1, Including Its Statement of Privacy Practices”).
Insert the title of the assertion used by management of the service organization (for example, “Management of XYZ Service Organization’s
Assertion Regarding Its Description of the Claims-Processing System, the Suitability of the Design and Operating Effectiveness of Controls, and
Compliance With the Commitments in Its Statement of Privacy Practices Throughout the Period January 1, 20X1, to December 31, 20X1”).Appendix D
Definitions
For purposes of this Guide, the following terms have the meanings attributed in the subsequent text:
Applicable trust services criteria. The criteria in Trust Services Principles and Criteria, for Security ,
Availability , Processing Integrity , Confidentiality and Privacy (that are applicable to the principle(s) being
reported on.
Boundaries of the system. The boundaries of a system are the specific aspects of a service organization’s
infrastructure, software, people, procedures and data necessary to provide its services. When the systems for
multiple services share aspects, infrastructure, software, people, procedures and data, the systems will overlap,
but the boundaries of each service’s system will differ. In a SOC 2 engagement that addresses the privacy
principle, the system boundaries cover, at a minimum, all the system components as they relate to the personal
information life cycle within well-defined processes and informal ad hoc procedures.
Carve-out method. Method of addressing the services provided by a subservice organization whereby
management’s description of the service organization’s system identifies the nature of the services performed by
the subservice organization and excludes from the description and scope of the service auditor’s engagement the
subservice organization’s controls to meet the applicable trust services criteria. The description of the service
organization’s system and the scope of the engagement include controls at the service organization that monitor
the effectiveness of controls at the subservice organization, which may include the service organization’s review
of a servicer auditor’s report on controls at the subservice organization.
Complementary user-entity controls. Controls that management assumes, in the design of the service
provided by the service organization, will be implemented by user entities and that, if necessary to achieve the
applicable trust services criteria, are identified as such in that description.
Controls at a service organization. The policies and procedures at a service organization that are likely to be
relevant to user entities’ internal control, as they relate to meeting the applicable trust services criteria. These
policies and procedures are designed, implemented, and documented by the service organization to provide
reasonable assurance about meeting the applicable trust services criteria.
Controls at a subservice organization. The policies and procedures at a subservice organization that are
likely to be relevant to user entities of the service organization, as they relate to meeting the applicable trust
services criteria. These policies and procedures are designed, implemented, and documented by the subserviceorganization to provide reasonable assurance about meeting the applicable trust services criteria.
Criteria. The standards or benchmarks used to measure and present the subject matter and against which the
practitioner evaluates the subject matter.
Data subjects. The individuals about whom personal information is collected.
Inclusive method. Method of addressing the services provided by a subservice organization whereby the
service organization’s description of its system includes a description of the nature of the services provided by
the subservice organization, as well as the subservice organization’s controls to meet the applicable trust
services criteria.
Management’s assertion. A written assertion by management of a service organization or management of a
subservice organization, if applicable, about the matters referred to in paragraph 1.16(a)(ii)(1–4) of this Guide
for a type 2 report and the matters referred to in paragraph 1.16(b)(ii)(1–2) of this Guide for a type 1 report.
Personal information life cycle. The collection, use, retention, disclosure, disposal or anonymization of
personal information within well-defined processes and informal ad hoc procedures.
Privacy notice. A written communication by entities that collect personal information to the individuals about
whom personal information is collected about the entity’s (a) policies regarding the nature of the information that
they will collect and how that information will be used, retained, disclosed, and disposed of or anonymized and
(b) the entity’s commitment to adhere to those policies. A privacy notice also includes information about such
matters as the purpose of collecting the information, the choices that individuals have related to their personal
information, the security of such information, and how individuals can contact the entity with inquiries,
complaints, and disputes related to their personal information. When a user entity collects personal information
from individuals, it typically provides a privacy notice to those individuals.
Service auditor. A practitioner who reports on the fairness of the presentation of a service organization’s
description of its system, the suitability of the design of controls included in the description and, in a type 2
report, the operating effectiveness of those controls to meet the applicable trust services criteria. When the
report addresses the privacy principle, the service auditor also reports on the service organization’s compliance
with the commitments in its statement of privacy practices.
Service organization. An organization or segment of an organization that provides services to user entities
related to the applicable trust services criteria.
Statement of privacy practices. A written communication by the service organization to the user entities that
includes the same types of privacy policies and commitments that are included in a privacy notice (see the
definition of privacy notice). It is written from the perspective of the service organization and is provided to the
user entities when the service organization is involved in any of the phases of the personal information life cycle.
The user entity , rather than the service organization, is responsible for providing the privacy notice. A statement
of privacy practices provides a basis for the user entities to prepare a privacy notice to be sent to individuals orfor ensuring that the service organization has appropriate practices for meeting the existing privacy commitments
of user entities. The criteria for the content of a statement of privacy practices are set forth in Trust Service
Principles.
Subservice provider. A service organization used by another service organization to perform services related
to the applicable trust services criteria.
Tests of compliance with commitments in the statement of privacy practices. Procedures designed to
help provide reasonable assurance of detecting material noncompliance with the service organization’s
commitments related to privacy.
Test of controls. A procedure designed to evaluate the operating effectiveness of controls in meeting the
applicable trust services criteria.
User  entity. An entity that uses a service organization.Appendix E
Reporting on Controls at a Cloud Computing Service
Organization
This appendix describes cloud computing service organizations and provides an overview of the risks
and challenges associated with performing a service organization controls (SOC) 2 engagement for
cloud service organizations.
A cloud computing service organization (cloud service organization) provides user entities with on-demand
access to a shared pool of configuarable computing resources (for example, networks, servers, storage and
applications). Cloud computing is becoming an important IT strategy for user entities that need varying levels of
IT resources and for whom purchasing and maintaining sophisticated and costly IT resources is not an effective
strategy.
Definition of Cloud Computing
Although many definitions of the term cloud computing exist, the following definition from the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST)
1 is widely used:
Cloud computing is a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of
configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be
rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction. This cloud
model promotes availability and is composed of five essential characteristics, three service models, and four
deployment models.
Essential Characteristics:
On-demand self-service. A consumer can unilaterally provision computing capabilities, such as server time
and network storage, as needed automatically without requiring human interaction with each service’s
provider.
Broad network access. Capabilities are available over the network and accessed through standard
mechanisms that promote use by heterogeneous thin or thick client platforms (e.g., mobile phones, laptops,
and PDAs).Resource pooling. The provider’s computing resources are pooled to serve multiple consumers using a
multi-tenant model, with different physical and virtual resources dynamically assigned and reassigned
according to consumer demand. There is a sense of location independence in that the customer generally has
no control or knowledge over the exact location of the provided resources but may be able to specify
location at a higher level of abstraction (e.g., country , state, or datacenter). Examples of resources include
storage, processing, memory , network bandwidth, and virtual machines.
Rapid elasticity. Capabilities can be rapidly and elastically provisioned, in some cases automatically , to
quickly scale out and rapidly released to quickly scale in. To the consumer, the capabilities available for
provisioning often appear to be unlimited and can be purchased in any quantity at any time.
Measured service. Cloud systems automatically control and optimize resource use by leveraging a metering
capability at some level of abstraction appropriate to the type of service (e.g., storage, processing,
bandwidth, and active user accounts). Resource usage can be monitored, controlled, and reported providing
transparency for both the provider and consumer of the utilized service.
Ser vice Models:
Cloud Software as a Service (SaaS). The capability provided to the consumer is to use the provider’s
applications running on a cloud infrastructure. The applications are accessible from various client devices
through a thin client interface such as a web browser (e.g., web-based email). The consumer does not
manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure including network, servers, operating systems, storage,
or even individual application capabilities, with the possible exception of limited user-specific application
configuration settings.
Cloud Platform as a Service (PaaS). The capability provided to the consumer is to deploy onto the cloud
infrastructure consumer-created or acquired applications created using programming languages and tools
supported by the provider. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure
including network, servers, operating systems, or storage, but has control over the deployed applications and
possibly application hosting environment configurations.
Cloud Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). The capability provided to the consumer is to provision
processing, storage, networks, and other fundamental computing resources where the consumer is able to
deploy and run arbitrary software, which can include operating systems and applications. The consumer does
not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure but has control over operating systems, storage,
deployed applications, and possibly limited control of select networking components (e.g., host firewalls).
Deploym ent Models:
Private cloud. The cloud infrastructure is operated solely for an organization. It may be managed by the
organization or a third party and may exist on premise or off premise.Community cloud. The cloud infrastructure is shared by several organizations and supports a specific
community that has shared concerns (e.g., mission, security requirements, policy , and compliance
considerations). It may be managed by the organizations or a third party and may exist on premise or off
premise.
Public cloud. The cloud infrastructure is made available to the general public or a large industry group and is
owned by an organization selling cloud services.
Hybrid cloud. The cloud infrastructure is a composition of two or more clouds (private, community , or
public) that remain unique entities but are bound together by standardized or proprietary technology that
enables data and application portability (e.g., cloud bursting for load-balancing between clouds).
Although management of a user entity may outsource the IT functions to a cloud service organization, it cannot
outsource its responsibility for the operations of those functions. As a result, management of a user entity may
need to actively monitor and assess aspects of the cloud service organization’s system that affect the services
provided to the user entity . The very characteristics that make cloud computing an attractive solution may also
increase certain risks to the user entities. For example
the increased sharing of system resources among user entities increases the risk that the activities of one user
entity will adversely affect the availability , security , processing integrity , confidentiality and privacy of the
other user entities.
the essential characteristics of cloud computing make it difficult to assess whether the cloud service
organization is fulfilling certain commitments related to confidentiality and privacy that it has made to user
entities, such as in contracts, service level agreements or statements of privacy practices. For example, a
cloud service organization may reallocate online data storage space between user entities to address the
changing demands for resources. In these circumstances, the second user entity may be able to access the
data of the original user of the storage space, unless the cloud service organization has controls to erase that
data from the storage space.
the aggregation of many user entities’ data in a single cloud environment increases the attractiveness of the
cloud computing organization as a target for attacks, given the extent of data that can potentially be
compromised and misused.
cloud providers spawn and retire virtual servers regularly to respond to changing user-entity demands. The
transitory nature of these virtual servers increases the risk that unauthorized system changes are introduced in
the respawning processes (that is, bringing the server up again). In addition, this transitory nature increases
the risk that traditional audit trails (for example, system logs or configuration reports) will not provide
sufficient evidence of the functioning of controls for the cloud-based systems.
the dynamic nature of cloud computing can result in the data being stored on different physical storage
devices using different data security controls. As a result, data security controls designed with the assumptionthat data is stored in a static location may not be effective.
Challenges Faced by the Cloud Service Organization in Meeting
Users’ Information Needs
In order for management of a user entity to actively monitor and assess aspects of the cloud service
organization’s system that affect the services provided to the user entity , it will need information about the
service organization’s system. In providing such information, the cloud service organization faces many of the
traditional challenges faced by service organizations, including the following:
Controlling the cost and disruption resulting from inquiries and visits from multiple user entities who wish to
obtain information about the system and test system controls that are relevant to those user entities. Adding to
such costs and disruption is the time required to train user entity personnel about cloud services, processes,
and architecture.
Balancing the need to protect user entities’ information against the need to provide governance, risk and
control information to existing and prospective user entities. For example, providing a user entity with detaile
d
security configuration information regarding the cloud environment increases the risk that personnel at that
user entity will use that information to compromise security and gain access to other user entities’ data.
Balancing the need to provide information about the system to user entities in an effective and efficient manner
against the need to protect the cloud service organization from risks, such as the disclosure of confidential
user-entity information. For example, in a traditional data center setting, a user entity usually has access to all
data and system resources for a dedicated email server. If a cloud computing architecture comingles emails
from multiple users in a single database, providing such access to all data and system resources in a cloud
setting would compromise the confidentiality of other user entities’ email.
A service auditor’s SOC 2 report can be an effective tool for communicating information about the cloud
service organization’s services and the suitability of the design and operating effectiveness of controls over the
systems that provides these services. It can provide assurance to existing and prospective user entities regarding
the service organization’s services, including confidence in the security , availability and processing integrity of the
system and controls over data confidentiality and privacy of information. This additional confidence can help the
cloud service organization address the concerns of prospective and existing customers in a consistent and
comprehensive manner, rather than having to customize a response to specific requirements of different user
entities. In a new and developing industry , such confidence can help increase the rate of adoption of a cloud
service organization’s services and the extent to which user entities are willing to trust critical operations to the
cloud environment.
Risk Considerations When Performing a SOC 2 Engagement for aCloud Service Organization
Performing a SOC 2 engagement for a cloud service organization is conceptually the same as performing such
an engagement for any other service organization that provides IT services. However, when performing these
engagements, the service auditor needs to pay particular attention to matters such as the following:
Shared responsibility. The responsibility for controls is shared between the user entities and the service
organization. One challenge of providing cloud services is that different user entities will often require varying
levels of service and related responsibility and accountability on the part of the cloud service organization. In
these situations, the service auditor needs to consider the processes and controls that the cloud service
organization has in place to address the differing requirements of its user entities.
Information life cycle management when reporting on confidentiality and privacy. Information life cycle
management is one of the most challenging aspects of managing a cloud, particularly when addressing privacy
requirements. Because cloud service organizations have multiple clients sharing system resources, and these
shared resources (for example, servers and storage devices) may be reallocated among the clients depending
on needs at a given time, information-life-cycle management for any particular client may become highly
complex and challenging to administer.
Comingling of data when reporting on confidentiality and privacy. Many SaaS environments comingle
the data of user entities in a single database. As a result, it may be difficult to completely destroy or return
user-entity data at the end of its life cycle or at the end of the relationship between a user entity and cloud
service provider.
Transnational data processing and storage. Many types of data, including personal information, are
subject to specific laws and regulations in the jurisdiction in which the data is created or in which the data
subject is a resident of, including restrictions on the transfer of data to other jurisdictions. Cloud service
providers may be unaware of the particular requirements for any one user entity , and the multinational
architecture of a cloud infrastructure may result in unintended violations of laws and regulations by the user
entity.
Availability, continuity of operations, and disaster recovery when reporting on availability.  Cloud
computing environments are inherently complex due to the need to support multiple clients with varying
system requirements (for example, different operating systems and virtual servers) and variations in the
demand for resources among clients. Due to this complexity , techniques for maintaining system availability ,
providing for continuity of operations when a disruption has occurred and recovering from a disaster vary
significantly from traditional techniques. The flexibility provided by cloud architecture usually provides the
cloud with the technological ability to recover user-entity processing on different hardware operating in the
same or a different facility but requires more complex processes and controls to do so.
Virtualization technologies. Although not unique to a cloud, the implementation, configuration, protection,
operation and support of virtualization hypervisors is critical to most cloud computing environments. Ahypervisor is a software program that manages multiple operating systems on a single computer system.
Hypervisors need to be configured and managed to meet the combined security , availability and processing-
integrity needs of customers. A service auditor needs to understand the hypervisor(s) used by the cloud
service organization and the unique policies, procedures and processes used to configure and maintain them.
The service auditor also needs to address the same issues with regard to any applications or software
infrastructure provided in a multi- tenancy environment.
Transitory nature of virtual environments. Because of the virtual nature of individual user-entity
processing environments and the highly dynamic nature of resource allocation, traditional testing strategies
related to system configuration may not provide sufficient evidence about the operating effectiveness of
controls. Similarly , audit evidence traditionally used to evaluate the operation of the control may not exist or
may not be sufficiently reliable when testing in a cloud environment. The service auditor needs to give
consideration to these factors in planning and performing his or her audit.
Encryption and key management.2 Encryption is generally an effective way of protecting information in a
cloud computing environment. Encryption of data may be the responsibility of the user entity , cloud service
organization or both and may vary from user entity to user entity within any one cloud computing
environment. A cloud service organization needs to have processes and controls in place to meet its
responsibilities, in accordance with service level agreements. In addition, processes and controls are needed
to protect encryption keys during key generation, storage, use, change and destruction.
Engagement Acceptance Considerations for the Service Auditor
Prior to accepting an engagement to report on controls at a service organization related to the trust services
principles, a practitioner should consider whether he or she has the necessary skills and knowledge to perform
the audit or will need to use the work of a specialist with the necessary skills and knowledge.
In performing a SOC 2 engagement for a cloud service organization, a service auditor needs to consider the
following:
Whether the cloud environment is private, public, community or hybrid and the different risks that each
deployment model brings to the environment.
Whether the description is sufficient to meet the needs of user entities based on industry and regulatory
considerations. The cloud service provider’s description of its system should address unique aspects that
cloud computing brings to common processes, including the following:
Data governance
Information leakage
Hardware disposal
Hypervisor security and change control
Spawning and retirement of virtual systems
Encryption
Incident management
Use of third parties
Because of the rapidly evolving nature of cloud computing, service auditors should consider consulting the
publications and online resources of organizations that address cloud computing, including the NIST, the
European Network and Information Security Agency , and the Cloud Security Alliance (CSA).
When reporting on privacy in a cloud environment, how privacy risks are affected by the shared aspects of a
cloud environment, including the following:
Privacy policies and notices
Breach notice
Access
Regulatory requirements
The types of personal information in the cloud environment and its sensitivity
Sharing of information with third parties
Whether the controls identified are sufficiently responsive to the applicable trust services criteria, given the
dynamic nature of cloud computing and the particular risks associated with it.
Whether the results of tests of controls will be sufficient to support the auditor’s opinion, given the dynamic
nature of infrastructure considerations. For example, security configurations of hypervisors and servers are
subject to frequent modification throughout the period. Tests that infer the operating effectiveness of controls
through inspection of the results of their operation (for example, inspection of security configuration files) are
likely to be less effective, unless performed throughout the report period using a statistics-based sampling
approach.
Cloud Security Frameworks
Due to the immaturity and rapid growth of cloud computing, cloud service organizations and their user entities
are still refining the security processes and controls that should be in place at the service organization. To aid in
this effort, cloud service organizations and user entities have joined together with governmental bodies in several
different efforts to develop frameworks for assessing risks, processes, and controls for a cloud environment.
Implementation of a framework could be demonstrated by a SOC 2 report in which the description of the
system includes descriptions of the framework used, the processes designed to address the framework
requirements and controls implemented in response to the framework requirements.
One leading framework has been developed by the CSA. This framework consists of the following:
Consensus assessment questions that have been developed to help user entities gather information relevant to
the security and availability of a cloud service provider’s system
1
2
Common controls matrix that provides cloud service providers and user entities with illustrative controls
More information on the CSA framework can be found at https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/.
Mell, Peter and Tim Grance, “The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing,” V ersion 15 (October 7, 2009)
http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/cloud-computing/.
Encryption is a form of security that turns information, images, programs or other data into unreadable cipher by applying a se t of complex
algorithms to the original material. These algorithms transfer the data into streams or blocks of seemingly random alphanumeric characters. An
encryption key might encrypt, decrypt or perform both functions, depending on the type of encryption software being used.